TALES FROM
ONE POCKET
13
Dr. Mejzlik’s Case
“Listen, Mr. Dastych,” Detective Captain Mejzlik said
pensively to the police department’s shrewd old pro, “the
truth of the matter is that I’ve come to you for advice. I
have a certain case I don’t know what on earth to do
about.”
“Out with it then,” said Mr. Dastych. “Whom does the
case concern?”
“Me,” sighed Dr. Mejzlik. “The more I think about it,
the less I understand it. You know, a person could go crazy
just thinking about it.”
“So who did what to you?” Mr. Dastych asked in a
soothing voice.
“Nobody,” Dr. Mejzlik burst out. “That’s the worst part
of it. I myself did something that I don’t understand.”
“Perhaps it’s not all that bad,” old Dastych consoled
him. “Just what did you do, young man?”
“I caught a safecracker,” Dr. Mejzlik answered gloomily.
“And that’s all?”
“That’s all.”
“And perhaps he wasn’t the right safecracker,” Mr.
Dastych said helpfully.
“But he was; in fact he’s already confessed. He broke
into the safe at the Jewish Benevolent Association; did you
hear about it? His name was Rozanowski or Rosenbaum or
something, from Lvov,” grumbled Dr. Mejzlik. “They found
the safecracking tools on him and everything.”
“Well then, what would you like to know?” old
Dastych encouraged him.
“I would like to know,” the police captain began
14
thoughtfully, “how it was I caught him. Wait, I’ll tell you
just what happened. A month ago, it was March third, I
was on duty till midnight. I don’t know if you remember,
but it had been raining for three days straight. So I stopped
in at a coffee shop for a moment, and after that I meant to
go right home, to Vinohrady. But instead of that I headed in
the opposite direction, toward Dlazdena Street. Tell me,
please, do you have any idea why I went straight to that
part of town?”
“Perhaps it was merely by chance,” Mr. Dastych ventured.
“Listen, in that kind of weather a person doesn’t drag
his feet through the streets merely by chance. I’d like to
know what, by all that’s holy, I was doing there. What do
you think, could it have been some kind of premonition?
You know, something like telepathy?”
“Aha,” said Mr. Dastych. “It’s entirely possible.”
“So you see,” Dr. Mejzlik said worriedly. “There we
have it. But it could also have been some kind of subconscious
notion that made me drop by to see what was happening
at The Three Maidens.”
“That’s that cheap dive on Dlazdena Street,” Mr.
Dastych recalled.
“Precisely. All the safecrackers and pickpockets from
Pest and Halic bed down there when they come to Prague
on business. We keep an eye on that place. What do you
think, couldn’t it have simply been ordinary police routine
for me to go there and take a look around?”
“It could,” declared Mr. Dastych. “Sometimes people do
things like that quite automatically, especially when they feel
a sense of obligation, you might say. There isn’t anything
strange about that.”
“So I go to Dlazdena Street,” Dr. Mejzlik continued,
“and while I’m in the neighborhood I check the room
register at The Three Maidens, and then I go on down the
street. At the end of Dlazdena Street I come to a stop and I
15
turn back again; kindly tell me, why would I have turned
back again?”
“Habit,” offered Mr. Dastych. “The routine habit of a
patrol officer.”
“Might be,” the police captain agreed. “But I wasn’t on
duty and I wanted to go home. Maybe it was a hunch.”
“There’ve been such cases,” Mr. Dastych acknowledged.
“But there’s nothing mysterious about a hunch like that.
After all, it’s well known that people have higher powers of
one kind or another . . . ”
“My God,” bellowed Dr. Mejzlik, “was it routine habit
then, or some kind of higher power? That’s what I’d like to
know! — But wait: While I’m trudging along, there’s some
man coming toward me from the opposite direction. You’ll
say, why on earth shouldn’t somebody be walking along
Dlazdena Street at one o’clock at night, in whatever direction?
There’s nothing suspicious about that. I myself didn’t
think anything of it; but I stopped directly under the
streetlight and lit a cigarette. That’s what we do, you know,
when we want to check out somebody at night. What do
you think: was it chance, or habit, or . . . or some sort of
subconscious warning?”
“I don’t know,” said Mr. Dastych.
“I don’t either,” Dr. Mejzlik shouted angrily. “Damn it
all! So I’m lighting a cigarette under the streetlight and this
man is coming along towards me. I wasn’t even checking
him out, just standing there staring at the ground. But as
this fellow passed by, something started bothering me.
Damn, I said to myself, there’s something wrong here — but
what exactly? I mean, I hadn’t paid any real attention to his
lordship at all. So I’m standing in the rain under the
streetlight and thinking things over; and all at once it hit
me: his shoes! That man had something odd on his shoes.
And I’ll tell you right now what it was: powder.”
“What kind of powder?” asked Mr. Dastych.
“Well, powder. In that instant I remembered that the
16
man had some dusty powder between the soles and the
uppers of his shoes.”
“And why wouldn’t he have dusty powder on his
shoes?” Mr. Dastych wanted to know.
“It’s obvious,” Dr. Mejzlik cried out. “I’m telling you,
sir, in that split second I saw, yes, saw the insulating material
they use in safes that gets scattered all over the floor.
You know, the powder between the steel plates. And I saw
those shoes tramping through that powder.”
“That was intuition,” Mr. Dastych decided. “Ingenious,
but pure intuition.”
“Baloney,” said Dr. Mejzlik. “Man, if it hadn’t been
raining I wouldn’t even have noticed the powder. But when
it’s raining, people don’t usually have powder on their shoes,
understand?”
“That was empirical deduction,” Mr. Dastych said with
certainty. “It was a brilliant inference based on experience.
So what happened next?”
“Well, naturally I followed the man; he went into The
Three Maidens, of course. And I telephoned for two plainclothesmen
and we raided the place; we found Mr.
Rosenbaum there along with his powder and his safecracking
tools and twenty thousand from the Jewish Benevolent
Association’s safe. The rest of it doesn’t matter. But you
know, the newspapers said that this time our police demonstrated
considerable preparedness — what a lot of baloney!
Believe me, if I hadn’t by chance gone to Dlazdena Street
and by chance noticed the shoes on that crook . . . What I
mean is,” Dr. Mejzlik said dispiritedly, “if it really was only
by chance. That’s the problem.”
“It makes no difference whatsoever,” stated Mr.
Dastych. “Young man, it was an achievement for which you
should be congratulated.”
“Congratulated!” Dr. Mejzlik exploded. “Why should I
be congratulated when I don’t know what for? For my
incredible shrewdness as a detective? For automatic, routine
17
police work? For pure luck? For some sort of intuition or
telepathy? Look, this was my first big case; a person has to
have something to build on, right? Say that tomorrow they
assign me some sort of murder; Mr. Dastych, what will I do?
Am I supposed to run around the streets peering shrewdly at
people’s shoes? Or just go about my business and wait for
some hunch or inner voice to lead me straight to the murderer?
That’s it, you see, that’s my situation. Now the whole
police force is saying: that Mejzlik, he’s got a real flair; that
young fellow with the glasses is going to go places with his
talents as a detective. It’s an awful situation, no doubt about
it,” Dr. Mejzlik muttered. “A person’s got to have some kind
of method. Until I had my first case, I believed in all manner
of exact methods; you know, like careful observation, expertise,
systematic investigation, and similar nonsense. But after
dealing with this case, I see that — Listen,” he blurted out
with relief, “I think it was nothing but chance.”
“It looks that way,” said Mr. Dastych prudently. “But
there was also a bit of solid observation involved and a
certain amount of logic.”
“And mechanical routine,” the young policeman added
despondently.
“And intuition. And also something of a talent for
hunches. And instinct.”
“Jesus Christ,” moaned Dr. Mejzlik. “See what I mean?
So what am I supposed to do now, Mr. Dastych?”
“ — Dr. Mejzlik, you’re wanted on the telephone,” the
waiter announced. “Police headquarters.”
“Here we go,” Dr. Mejzlik murmured in alarm; and
when he returned to the table, he looked pale and tense.
“Check, please,” he called out irritably. “It’s already started.
They found some foreigner murdered in a hotel. Damn, if
only — ” and he left. It seemed that the resolute young man
had a bad case of butterflies.
18
The Blue Chrysanthemum
“Well, I’ll tell you,” said old Fulinus, “how Klara comes into
this story. I was in charge of the gardens on Prince
Lichtenberg’s estate in Lubenic in those days — that old
prince, mister, he was a real connoisseur; he had Veitsche
send whole trees from England, and he brought in seventeen
thousand bulbs specially from Holland — but that’s beside
the point. One Sunday, then, I’m going down the street in
Lubenic and I meet up with Klara; that was the village idiot,
you know, deaf and dumb, a crazy, simple-minded fool of a
girl who wandered all over, braying as cheerful as can be —
can you tell me, mister, why these idiots are so blessed
cheerful? Anyway, I was trying to dodge her, so she wouldn’t
slobber me with a kiss, when all of a sudden I caught sight
of a bunch of flowers in her paws. She had some dillweed
and other such stuff from the fields, but in amongst them,
mister — I’ve seen a lot of things, but this one really bowled
me over. I tell you, that crazy girl had one pompon chrysanthemum
in her nosegay that was blue! Blue, sir! It was just
as blue as Phlox laphami; a little slate tinge to it, with
satiny, rosy edges and a center like Campanula turbinata,
beautifully full, but all that’s the least of it: mister, that blue
color was then and is still to this very day absolutely unknown
in chrysanthemums! Two years ago I was with old
Veitsche, you know, and Sir James was bragging to me
about how, the year before, one of their chrysanthemums,
this import straight from China, had bloomed a speck lilac
in color, but unfortunately it died on them over the winter.
And here in the claws of that cackling rattlebrain was a
chrysanthemum as blue as you could ever hope to see.
19
Right.
“So here was this Klara, mooing cheerfully and shoving
her bunch of flowers at me. I gave her a little coin from my
change, pointed to the chrysanthemum, and said, ‘Klara,
where’d you get this?’ Klara cackled and snorted, just as
pleased as could be, but I didn’t get anything more out of
her. I hollered at her, pointed with my hands, but it was no
use; no matter what, she was going to throw her arms
around me. I took that blue chrysanthemum and went
straight to the old prince: ‘Your Highness, here’s what’s
growing somewhere nearby; let’s go find it.’ The old prince
immediately ordered a coach so we could take Klara with
us. But in the meantime Klara had gone off somewhere and
couldn’t be found. We stood there by the rig, swearing for a
good hour — His Highness used to be with the dragoons.
We were still at it when Klara dashed up with her tongue
lolling out and jammed a whole bunch of fresh blue chrysanthemums
at me, torn right off the bush. The prince whipped
out a bill for her then and there, but Klara started
boohooing with disappointment; poor thing, she didn’t know
about paper money. I had to give her a coin to quiet her
down. Then she started dancing around and shrieking, but
we set her up on the driver’s box, pointed to the blue
chrysanthemums, and said, ‘Klara, take us there!’
“Klara whooped with glee up there on the box; you
can’t imagine how his High and Mightiness the coachman
was horrified at having to sit next to her. Besides which, the
horses would skitter every time she squealed and cock-adoodled,
oh, I’ll tell you, it was the devil’s own ride. After
we’d been going for an hour and a half I said, ‘Your Highness,
we’ve already covered at least eight miles.’
“‘No matter,’ muttered the prince, ‘a hundred miles if
need be.’
“‘All right,’ I said, ‘I’m all for it, but Klara brought
back that second bouquet inside of an hour. That place can’t
be more than two miles from Lubenic.’
20
“‘Klara,’ cries the prince, pointing to the blue chrysanthemums,
‘where do these grow? Where did you find them?’
“Klara croaked and gurgled and pointed still further
ahead; probably she liked riding up there on the coach. You
know, I thought the prince was going to kill her; dear Jesus,
that man could carry on! Lather was dripping off the horses,
Klara was cackling, the prince was cursing, the driver only
by some miracle kept from sobbing in shame, and I was
working out a strategy for tracking down that blue chrysanthemum.
‘Your Highness,’ says I, ‘this isn’t going to work.
We’ll have to look without Klara. We’ve got to mark out a
two-mile area on the map, divide it up into sections, and
have a house-to-house search.’
“‘My God,’ says the prince, ‘there isn’t a single park
within two miles of Lubenic!’
“‘That’s all right,’ says I. ‘The devil of a lot you’ll find
in a park, unless you’re looking for ageratum or canna.
Look, down here on the stalk is a bit of soil; that’s not
humus, it’s a greasy, yellowish clay, most likely fertilized by
human whatchamacallit. We’ve got to look for a place where
there’s plenty of pigeons; there’s lots of pigeon droppings on
these leaves. And most likely this grows by a fence made
from peeled stakes, because here at the leafstalk is a chip of
fir bark. That’s our clue, right there.’
“‘What do you mean?’ says the prince.
“‘What I mean,’ says I, ‘is that we have to look around
every shed and shanty within an area of two miles. We’ll
break up into four search parties: you, me, your gardener,
and my helper, Vencl, and that’s that.’
“Well then, next morning the first thing that happened
was that Klara brought me another bouquet of blue chrysanthemums.
I searched all over my section after that: I drank
warm beer at every local pub, ate homemade cheeses, and
asked people about blue chrysanthemums. Mister, don’t ask
me what kind of diarrhea I got from those cheeses; it was
hot, the way it sometimes gets at the end of September, and
21
I made it into every little farmhouse and had to put up with
every kind of rudeness, because people thought that I was
either crazy, or a salesman, or somebody from the government.
But one thing was clear by nighttime: there was no
blue chrysanthemum growing in my section. There wasn’t
any in the other three, either. Yet Klara brought me one
more broken-off branch of blue chrysanthemums.
“You know, a prince is an important person, however
you look at it. He called in detectives, put blue chrysanthemums
in their hands, and promised them I-don’t-know-what
if they could show him where they grew. Detectives, mister,
are educated people; they read newspapers and the like;
besides, they know every trick and stick and they have
enormous influence. Think of it, mister: on that day there
were six detectives plus ordinary policemen, the city council,
school kids with their teachers, and even a band of gypsies
prowling over that whole patch of land inside the two-mile
circle, and they tore up everything in bloom and brought it
to the manor. Great heavens, it was like Corpus Christi Day;
but as to blue chrysanthemums, there wasn’t a one. We had
to keep an eye on Klara all day long; she took off in the
evening, though, and then after midnight she brought me a
whole armful of blue chrysanthemums. Straightaway we shut
her up in jail so she wouldn’t yank them all up, but we’d
come to a dead end. I must say, it was mystifying; just
imagine, an area no bigger than the palm of your hand —
“Listen, a man has a right to get nasty when he’s in
terrible need or when he meets up with failure; I know that.
But when His Highness told me in a fury that I was as big
an idiot as Klara, I told him straight out that I wasn’t going
to let an old cretin like him talk to me that way, and I left
right then and there for the train station, and I haven’t been
back to Lubenic since. But after I was seated in the carriage
and the train began to move, I tell you, mister, I broke down
and cried like a child, because I wouldn’t see that blue
chrysanthemum and I was leaving it behind for good. And
22
then, while I was blubbering and looking out the window,
right there by the tracks I see something blue. Mister, it was
stronger than I was: it tossed me up out of my seat and
made me pull the emergency brake — I didn’t have a thing
to do with it. The train jolted when it braked, and I got
thrown down on the seat opposite — I broke this finger, too.
And when the conductor came running, I stammered about
how I’d forgotten something in Lubenic, and I had to pay a
hell of a fine. Mister, I swore like a sergeant all the time I
was limping back along the tracks to where that blue was.
You blockhead, I told myself, it’s probably nothing but an
autumn aster or some other worthless trash, and you’ve just
thrown away a heathenish sum of money! I’d gone maybe
fifteen hundred feet; already I was thinking that that blue
couldn’t have been so far back, that I must have gone past
it, or at least so it seemed to me, when up on this small
bank I spy a little railway guard’s house, and there, peeking
through the stake fence around the garden plot, is that blue.
It was two clumps of blue chrysanthemums.
“Mister, even a child knows what those railway guards
grow in their garden plots. Besides cabbages and cucumbers,
there’s usually sunflowers, a couple of red rosebushes,
hollyhocks, tropaeolum, and some of those dahlias. But this
fellow, he didn’t even have that; only potatoes, beans, one
black elderberry and, there in the corner, those two blue
chrysanthemums.
“‘Say, mister,’ says I across the fence, ‘where’d you get
those posies?’
“‘Those blue ones?’ the watchman says. ‘Why, those
were left here after Cermak died; that was the guard here
before me. But you can’t walk on the tracks, mister. There’s
the sign: Walking on the Tracks is Forbidden. What are you
doing here?’
“‘Friend,’ I tell him, ‘I thank you, and how do I get to
where you are?’
“‘By way of the tracks,’ he says to that. ‘But nobody’s
23
allowed to walk on the tracks. What do you want? Get out
of here, you damned tramp, but keep your feet off of those
tracks!’
“‘How then,’ says I, ‘do I get out of here?’
“‘Who cares,’ yells the guard, ‘but not on the tracks,
and that’s that!’
“So I sit down by the edge of the track and I say,
‘Listen, grandpa, sell me those blue posies.’
“‘I’m not selling,’ grumped the guard. ‘And get out of
here now! You aren’t supposed to sit there.’
“‘Why not?’ says I. ‘Where does it say I can’t sit here?
Walking’s forbidden, but I’m not walking.’
“The guard pulled up short at that and had to be
content with cussing at me over the fence. But he must have
been a hermit; after a minute he quit and began talking to
himself. Then half an hour later, he stepped out to have a
look at the rails again.
“‘Well then,’ he says as he stops beside me, ‘are you
getting out of here now or not?’
“‘I can’t,’ says I. ‘Walking on the tracks is forbidden,
and there’s no other way to get out of here.’
“The guard thought it over for a while. Then he said,
‘I’ll tell you what. When I go down behind this bank, you
take off along the tracks and I won’t see you.’
“I thanked him heartily, and when he was gone I crept
over the fence to his little garden and with his own spade I
dug up both those blue chrystanthemums. I stole them,
mister. I’m an honest man and I’ve only stolen seven times in
my life; and always it was flowers.
“One hour later I was seated in the train taking those
stolen blue chrysanthemums home. As I was riding past the
guard’s house, there he stood with his little flag, looking
sour as the devil. I waved my hat at him, but I don’t think
he recognized me.
“There you have it, mister: there was that sign with
Walking on the Tracks Is Forbidden written on it, and
24
nobody, not us, not the policemen, not the gypsies, not even
the kids figured they could go there looking for blue chrysanthemums.
What power there is in a warning sign, mister!
For all I know, there may be blue primroses growing in
some railway guard’s little garden, or the tree of knowledge
or pure gold ferns; but nobody ever discovers them because
walking on the tracks is strictly forbidden and that’s that.
Only crazy Klara went there, because she was an idiot and
didn’t know how to read.
“That’s why I gave those blue chrysanthemums the
name of Klara. I’ve been babying them for fifteen years now.
But most likely I’m too fussy about proper soil and moisture
— for sure that barbarian of a guard never watered them, he
had clay hard as iron there in his garden. Well, in short,
they come up for me in the spring, they develop a fungus in
the summer, and they peter out by August. Think about it:
I’m the only one in the world with a blue chrysanthemum,
but I can’t prove it. Oh, Bretagne and Anastasia, sure,
they’re a bit purplish; but Klara, mister, once Klara blooms
for me, the whole world will talk of nothing else.”
25
The Fortuneteller
Anyone who is knowledgeable about such things will agree
that this story could never have taken place in Czechoslovakia
nor in France nor in Germany, for in those countries, as
is well known, judges are obliged to try sinners and punish
them in accordance with the letter of the law, rather than in
accordance with their own discretion and conscience. Because
in this story a judge pronounces his verdict not on the
basis of statutes, but on the basis of common sense, the
following incident could not have taken place anywhere but
in England; in fact, it took place in London, more precisely
in Kensington; or, wait a moment, it was in Brompton or
Bayswater; in short, there somewhere. The judge was Mr.
Justice Kelley, and the woman’s name was, quite simply,
Myers. Mrs. Edith Myers.
The next thing you should know is that this otherwise
quite respectable lady caught the attention of Police Superintendent
MacLeary. “My dear,” Mr. MacLeary said to his
wife one evening, “I cannot get that Mrs. Myers out of my
mind. I’d certainly like to know how the woman makes her
living. Imagine, she’s just sent her maid out, in February, for
asparagus! Furthermore, I’ve discovered that she has from
twelve to twenty visitors every day, from pushcart vendors
to duchesses. I know, dear girl, you’ll say she’s probably a
fortuneteller. Well and good, but that could just be a cover
for something else, for procuring, say, or espionage. Do go
have a look, because I’d like to know.”
“Well and good, Bob,” said the excellent Mrs.
MacLeary, “leave it to me.”
And so it was that the next day Mrs. MacLeary, with26
out her wedding ring of course and, on the contrary, very
girlishly dressed and curled like a young woman who ought
to have left such foolishness behind her long ago, with a
nervous look on her baby face, rang the bell at Mrs. Myers’
door in Bayswater or Marylebone. She had to wait for
several moments before Mrs. Myers admitted her.
“Be seated, dear child,” the old lady said once she had
thoroughly scrutinized her shy visitor. “What is it you wish
of me?”
“I,” Mrs. MacLeary stammered, “I . . . I’d like . . .
tomorrow is my twentieth birthday . . . I’d like awfully
much to know my future.”
“But, Miss . . . er, your name, please?” asked Mrs.
Myers, and she seized a pack of cards, which she began
shuffling briskly.
“Jones,” Mrs. MacLeary gasped.
“Dear Miss Jones,” Mrs. Myers continued, “there has
been a mistake; I don’t practice fortunetelling, except of
course now and then, out of friendship, as every old woman
does. Take the cards in your left hand and divide them into
five piles. That’s right. Sometimes I read the cards for
amusement, but apart from that — Look!” she exclaimed,
turning over the first pile. “Diamonds. That means money.
And the jack of hearts. This is a beautiful spread.”
“Ah,” said Mrs. MacLeary. “And what else?”
“Jack of diamonds,” announced Mrs. Myers, uncovering
the second pile. “Ten of spades, those are journeys. But
here,” she cried, “we have clubs. Clubs are always challenges,
but the queen of hearts is on the bottom.”
“What does that mean?” Mrs. MacLeary asked, opening
her eyes as wide as she could.
“Diamonds again,” Mrs. Myers mused over the third
pile. “Dear child, much money awaits you; but I still don’t
know whether it is you who will go on a longish journey or
someone close to you.”
“I have to go see my auntie in Southampton,” Mrs.
27
MacLeary offered.
“That will be a fairly long journey,” Mrs. Myers said,
turning over the fourth pile. “Someone will stand in your
way, some older man — ”
“Probably Daddy,” exclaimed Mrs. MacLeary.
“Well then, there we have it,” Mrs. Myers stated
ceremoniously over the fifth pile. “Dear Miss Jones, that was
the most beautiful hand I have ever seen. Within the year
you will be married; a very, very rich young man will marry
you, probably a millionaire or a wealthy businessman,
because he travels a great deal; but before this can happen,
you must overcome great obstacles; an older man will stand
in your way, but you must persevere. After you marry, you
will move very far away from here, probably overseas. I
charge one guinea, for the Christian mission among the
unfortunate blacks.”
“I’m so grateful to you,” Mrs. MacLeary said, taking a
pound note and a shilling from her purse, “so awfully
grateful! Please, Mrs. Myers, how much would it cost
without all those challenges?”
“The cards cannot be bought off,” the old lady remarked
with dignity. “What does your daddy do?”
“He’s with the police,” the young lady lied with an
innocent face. “He’s in the detective division.”
“Aha,” said the old lady, and she extracted three cards
from the piles. “This looks very nasty, very nasty. Tell him,
dear child, that great danger threatens him. He should come
to me to find out more about it. Many people from Scotland
Yard come to me, you know, to read the cards for them; and
they tell me everything that is in their hearts. Yes indeed,
just send him along to me. You say that he’s with the detective
division? Mr. Jones? Tell him I’ll be expecting him.
Goodbye, dear Miss Jones. Next, please!”
* * *
28
“I don’t like the looks of this,” Mr. MacLeary declared,
rubbing the back of his neck reflectively. “I don’t like the
looks of this, Katie. That woman was much too interested in
your dear departed father. Besides that, her name isn’t Myers
but Meierhofer, and she’s from Lubeck. Damned German,”
growled Mr. MacLeary, “I wonder how we can get our
hands on her. I’d lay five-to-one odds she worms things out
of people that are none of her business. Tell you what, I’m
going to talk to the head office about this.”
Mr. MacLeary did indeed talk to the head office about
this; oddly enough, the head office gave the matter its
serious attention, and so it happened that the worthy Mrs.
Myers was summoned before Mr. Justice Kelley.
“Well, Mrs. Myers,” the judge said to her, “what in
God’s name is all this about your telling fortunes with
cards?”
“Good heavens, sir,” the old lady said, “surely one must
earn one’s living somehow. At my age I’m not going to
dance in the follies.”
“Hm,” said Mr. Justice Kelley. “But the charge against
you is that you read the cards improperly. My dear Mrs.
Myers, that is the same as if you had packaged mud bars
and sold them as chocolate. For the price of one guinea,
people have a right to accurate predictions. Tell me, please,
how can you predict the future when you don’t know the
proper way to do it?”
“Not everyone complains,” the old lady replied defensively.
“You see, I predict things that people like to hear.
That pleasure, sir, is well worth a shilling or two. And
sometimes you actually hit it right on the button. ‘Mrs.
Myers,’ this one woman said to me the other day, ‘nobody,
but nobody reads the cards and counsels me as well as you
do.’ She lives in St. John’s Wood and is divorcing her husband.”
“Wait,” the judge cut in. “We have a witness for the
prosecution here. Mrs. MacLeary, tell us what happened.”
29
“Mrs. Myers explained,” Mrs. MacLeary began glibly,
“that the cards said I would be married within the year, that
a very rich young man would marry me, and that I would
go live with him overseas — ”
“Why overseas, exactly?” asked the judge.
“Because there was a ten of spades in the second pile;
that means journeys,” Mrs. Myers said.”
“Rubbish,” rumbled the judge. “The ten of spades
means expectations. Journeys are the jack of clubs; when the
seven of diamonds turns up with it, it means a great deal of
travel resulting in profit. Don’t try to hoodwink me, Mrs.
Myers. You told the witness that within the year she would
marry a rich young man, but Mrs. MacLeary has already
been married for three years to the excellent Police Superintendent
MacLeary. Mrs. Myers, how do you account for this
rubbish?”
“Oh, dear,” the old lady said placidly, “this does happen
from time to time. This young creature came to me all
decked out in frills and flounces, but her left glove was torn;
so she doesn’t have any money to spare, but she does like to
be stylish. She said she was twenty years old, but now it
turns out she’s twenty-five — ”
“Twenty-four,” Mrs. MacLeary burst out.
“That makes no difference; at any rate, she wanted to
get married — that is, she passed herself off as a Miss.
That’s why I read the cards for a wedding and a rich husband;
it seemed to me that fit the circumstances best.”
“What about those challenges, that older man, and the
trip overseas?” asked Mrs. MacLeary.
“So there would be more to it,” Mrs. Myers replied
candidly. “For one guinea a person should include the whole
works.”
“That’s enough,” the judge said. “It’s no use, Mrs.
Myers, your fortunetelling is sheer humbug. One must
understand the cards. There are various theories, it’s true,
but never, and bear this in mind, never does the ten of
30
spades mean journeys. You will pay a fine of fifty pounds,
just as do those who adulterate food or sell worthless
merchandise. You are also suspected, Mrs. Myers, of engaging
in espionage; but I doubt you’ll confess to that.”
“As God is my witness,” Mrs. Myers cried out, but Mr.
Justice Kelley interrupted her: “Come, come, we’ll disregard
that; but because you are an alien without regular employment,
the authorities will exercise their rights and order you
to leave the country. Godspeed, Mrs. Myers; thank you,
Mrs. MacLeary. But let me tell you, this fraudulent telling of
fortunes is a cynical and unscrupulous business. Remember
that, Mrs. Myers.”
“What will I do?” the old lady sighed. “Just when
business was starting to pick up — ”
A year later or so, Judge Kelley ran into Police Superintendent
MacLeary. “Lovely weather,” the judge said pleasantly.
“And how is Mrs. MacLeary?”
Mr. MacLeary glanced up with a sour expression. “The
thing is . . . you know, Mr. Kelley,” he said with some
embarrassment, “Mrs. MacLeary . . . the thing is, we’re
divorced.”
“Go on,” the judge said in astonishment. “Such a nice
young lady!”
“Quite so,” Mr. MacLeary grumbled, “but some young
good-for-nothing suddenly lost his head over her . . . some
millionaire businessman from Melbourne . . . I tried to stop
her, but . . . ” Mr. MacLeary threw out his hands in despair.
“Last week the two of them sailed for Australia.”
31
The Clairvoyant
“You know, Mr. DA,” Mr. Janowitz pontificated, “I’m not
an easy person to fool; after all, I’m not a Jew for nothing,
right? But what this fellow does is simply beyond belief. It
isn’t just graphology, it’s — I don’t know what. Here’s how
it works: you give him someone’s handwriting in an unsealed
envelope; he never even looks at the writing, just pokes his
fingers inside the envelope and feels the handwriting all
over; and all the while his face is twisting as if he were in
pain. And before very long he starts telling you about the
nature of the writer, but he does it in such a way that —
well, you’d be dumbfounded. He pegs the writer perfectly,
down to the last detail. I gave him an envelope with a letter
from old Weinberg in it; he had Weinberg figured out in no
time, even that he has diabetes and that he had to file for
bankruptcy. What do you say to that?”
“Nothing,” the district attorney said drily. “Maybe he
knows old Weinberg.”
“But he never even once looked at the handwriting,”
Mr. Janowitz protested. “He says every person’s handwriting
has its own aura, and he says that you can feel it, clearly
and precisely. He says it’s purely a physical phenomenon,
like radio. This isn’t some kind of swindle, Mr. DA; this
Prince Karadagh doesn’t make a penny from it. He’s supposed
to be from a very old family in Baku, according to
what this Russian told me. But I’ll tell you what, come see
for yourself; he’ll be in town this evening. You must come.”
“Listen, Mr. Janowitz,” the DA said, “this is all very
nice, but I only believe fifty percent of what foreigners say,
especially when I don’t know how they make their living; I
32
believe Russians even less, and fakirs less than that; but
when on top of everything else the man’s a prince, then I
don’t believe one word of it. Where did you say he learned
this? Ah yes, in Persia. Forget it, Mr. Janowitz; the whole
Orient’s a fraud.”
“But Mr. DA,” Mr. Janowitz said defensively, “this
young fellow explains it all scientifically; no magic tricks, no
mysterious powers, I’m telling you, strictly scientific
method.”
“Then he’s an even bigger phony,” the DA admonished
him. “Mr. Janowitz, I’m surprised at you; you’ve managed
to live your entire life without strictly scientific methods,
and here you are embracing them wholesale. Look, if there
were something to it, it would have been known long ago,
right?”
“Well,” Mr. Janowitz replied, a little shaken, “but when
I saw with my own eyes how he figured out everything
about old Weinberg! Now, there’s genius for you. I’ll tell you
what, Mr. DA, come and have a look for yourself; if it’s a
hoax you’ll know it, that’s your speciality, sir; nobody can
put one over on you, Mr. DA.”
“Hardly,” the DA said modestly. “All right, I’ll come,
Mr. Janowitz, but only to keep an eye on your
phenomenon’s fingers. It’s a shame that people are so gullible.
But you mustn’t tell him who I am; wait, I’ll bring
along some handwriting in an envelope for him, something
special. Count on it, friend; I’ll prove he’s a phony.”
You should understand that the district attorney (or, more
accurately: chief public prosecutor Dr. Klapka) would, in his
next court proceeding, be trying the case against Hugo
Müller, who was charged with premeditated murder. Mr.
Hugo Müller, millionaire industrialist, had been accused of
insuring his younger brother Ota for a large sum of money
and then drowning him in the lake at a summer resort; in
33
addition to this, he had also, during the previous year, been
under suspicion of dispatching his lover, but of course that
had not been proven. In short, it was a major trial, which
the district attorney wanted to be the making of his career;
and he had labored over the trial documents with all the
persistence and acumen that had made him a most formidable
prosecutor. It was not an open-and-shut case; the
district attorney would have given God-knows-what for one
particle of direct evidence; but as things stood, he would
have to rely more on his winning way with words to get the
jury to award him a rope for Mr. Müller; you must understand
that, for prosecutors, this is a point of honor.
Mr. Janowitz was a bit flustered that evening. “Dr.
Klapka,” he announced in muffled tones, “this is Prince
Karadagh; well, let’s get started.”
The DA cast probing eyes on the exotic creature; he
was a young and slender man with eyeglasses, the face of a
Tibetan monk, and delicate, thievish hands. Fancy-pants
quack, the district attorney decided.
“Mr. Karadagh,” Mr. Janowitz jabbered, “over here by
this little table. There’s already some mineral water here.
Please, switch on that little floor lamp; we’ll turn off the
overhead light so it won’t disturb you. There. Please, gentlemen,
there should be silence. Mr. — eh, Mr. Klapka here
brought some hand- writing of some sort; if Mr. Karadagh
would be so good as to — ”
The district attorney cleared his throat briefly and
seated himself so as best to observe the clairvoyant. “Here is
the handwriting sample,” he said, and he took an unsealed
envelope from his breast pocket. “If I may — ”
“Thank you,” the clairvoyant said impassively. He took
hold of the envelope and, with his eyes closed, turned it over
in his fingers. Suddenly he shuddered, twisting his head.
“Curious,” he muttered, and he took a gulp of water. He
then inserted his slim fingers into the envelope and suddenly
stopped; his pale yellow face seemed to turn paler still.
34
There was such a silence in the room that a slight
rattling could be heard from Mr. Janowitz, for Mr. Janowitz
suffered from goiter.
The thin lips of Prince Karadagh trembled and contorted
as if his fingers were clenching a red-hot iron, and
sweat broke out on his forehead. “I cannot endure this,” he
hissed in a constricted voice; he extracted his fingers from
the envelope, rubbed them with a handkerchief, and quickly
moved them back and forth over the tablecloth, as one
sharpens a knife, after which he sipped agitatedly from his
glass of water and then cautiously took the envelope between
his fingers again.
“The man who wrote this,” he began in a parched
voice, “the man who wrote this . . . There is great strength
here, but a — (obviously he was searching for a word) a
strength that lies in wait. This lying in wait is terrible,” he
cried out, and dropped the envelope on the table. “I would
not want this man as my enemy!”
“Why?” the district attorney could not refrain from
asking. “Is he guilty of something?”
“Don’t question me,” the clairvoyant said. “Every
question gives a hint. I only know that he could be guilty of
anything at all, of great and terrible deeds. There is astonishing
determination here . . . for success . . . for money . . .
This man would not scruple over the life of a fellow creature.
No, this is not an ordinary criminal; a tiger also is not
a criminal, a tiger is a great lord. This man would not be
capable of low trickery, but thinks of himself as ruling over
human lives. When he is on the prowl, he sees people only
as prey. And kills them.”
“Beyond good and evil,” the district attorney murmured
with unmistakable approval.
“Those are only words,” Prince Karadagh said. “No
one is beyond good and evil. This man has his own strict
concept of morality; he is in debt to no one, he does not
steal, he does not lie; if he kills, it is as if he checkmated in
35
a game of chess. It is his game, but he plays it squarely.”
The clairvoyant wrinkled his brow in concentration. “I don’t
know what it is. I see a large lake and a motor boat on it.”
“And what else?” the district attorney burst out,
scarcely breathing.
“There is nothing else to see; it is extremely hazy. It is
so strangely hazy compared with that brutal and ruthless
determination to bring down his prey. But there is no passion
in it, only reason. A thoroughly rational contemplation
of every detail. As if he were solving some technical problem
or mental exercise. No, this man feels no remorse. He is so
confident of himself, so self-assured; he has no fear even of
his own conscience. I have the impression of a man who
looks down on all from above; he is conceited in the extreme
and self-congratulatory; it pleases him that people fear
him.” The clairvoyant sipped his water. “But he is also a
hypocrite. At heart, an opportunist who would like to
astound the world with his actions — Enough. I am tired. I
do not like this man.”
“Listen, Janowitz,” the district attorney flung out excitedly,
“he is truly astonishing, this clairvoyant of yours. What he
described is a perfect likeness. A strong and ruthless man
who views people only as prey; the perfect player of his own
game; a brain who plans his moves with pure rationality and
no remorse; a gentleman yet also a hypocrite. Mr. Janowitz,
this Karadagh did him one-hundred percent justice!”
“You don’t say,” said the flattered Mr. Janowitz.
“Didn’t I tell you? That letter was from Schliefen, the textile
man from Liberec, right?”
“It most certainly was not,” exclaimed the district
attorney. “Mr. Janowitz, it was a letter from a murderer.”
“Imagine that,” Mr. Janowitz marveled. “And I thought
it was Schliefen; he’s a real crook, that Schliefen.”
“No. It was a letter from Hugo Müller, the fratricide.
36
Do you remember how that clairvoyant talked about a boat
on a lake? Müller threw his brother off that boat into the
water.”
“Imagine that,” said Mr. Janowitz, astonished. “You
see? That is a fabulous talent, Mr. DA!”
“Unquestionably,” the district attorney declared. “The
way he grasped Müller’s true nature and the motives behind
his actions, Mr. Janowitz, is simply phenomenal. Not even I
could have hit the mark with Müller so precisely. And this
clairvoyant found it out by feeling a few lines of Müller’s
handwriting — Mr. Janowitz, there’s something to this; there
must be some sort of special aura or something around
people’s handwriting.”
“What did I tell you?” Mr. Janowitz said triumphantly.
“If you would be so kind, Mr. District Attorney, I’ve never
seen the handwriting of a murderer.”
“With pleasure,” said the district attorney, and he took
the envelope from his pocket. “It’s an interesting letter,
besides,” he added, removing the paper from the envelope,
and suddenly his face changed color. “I . . . Mr. Janowitz,”
he blurted out, somewhat uncertainly, “this letter is a court
document; it is . . . I’m not allowed to show it to you.
Please forgive me.”
A moment later the district attorney was hurrying
homeward, not even noticing that it was raining. I’m an ass,
he told himself bitterly, I’m a fool, how could that have
happened to me? I’m an idiot! That in my haste I grabbed
not Müller’s letter but my own handwriting, my notes for
the trial, and shoved them in that envelope! I’m an imbecile!
So that was my handwriting! Thanks very much! Watch out,
you swindler, I’ll be lying in wait for you!
But all in all, the district attorney reflected, to be sure,
what the clairvoyant had said wasn’t so bad, for the most
part. Great strength; astonishing determination, if you
please; I’m not capable of low trickery; I have my own strict
concept of morality — As a matter of fact it’s quite flatter37
ing. That I feel no remorse? Thank God, I have no reason
to: I merely discharge my obligations. And as for the rational
contemplation, that’s also true. But as for being a hypocrite,
he’s mistaken. It’s still nothing but a hoax.
Suddenly he paused. It stands to reason, he told himself,
what that clairvoyant said can be applied to anyone at all!
These are only generalities, nothing more. Everyone’s a bit of
a hypocrite and opportunist. That’s the whole trick: to speak
in such a way that anyone could be identified. That’s it, the
district attorney decided, and opening his umbrella he
proceeded home at his usual energetic pace.
“My God!” groaned the presiding judge, stripping off his
gown, “seven o’clock already; it did drag on again! When
the district attorney spoke for two hours — but, dear colleague,
he won it; to get the rope on such weak evidence, I’d
call that success. Well, you never know with a jury. But he
spoke skillfully,” the presiding judge granted, washing his
hands. “Mainly in the way he dealt with Müller’s character,
that was a full-fledged portrait; you know, the monstrous,
inhuman nature of a murderer — it left you positively
shaken. Remember how he said, ‘This is no ordinary criminal;
he isn’t capable of low trickery, he neither lies nor
steals; and if he murders a man, he does it as calmly as
checkmating in a game of chess. He does not kill from
passion, but from cold, rational contemplation, as if he were
solving some technical problem or mental exercise.’ It was
very well spoken, my friend. And something else: ‘When he
is on the prowl, he sees his fellow creatures only as prey’ —
you know, that business about the tiger was perhaps a bit
theatrical, but the jury liked it.”
“Or,” the associate judge added, “the way he said,
‘Clearly this murderer has no remorse; he is so confident of
himself, so self-assured — he has no fear even of his own
conscience.’”
38
“Or then again,” the presiding judge continued, wiping
his hands with a towel, “the psychological observation that
the murderer is a hypocrite and an opportunist who would
like to astound the world with his actions — ”
“That Klapka,” the associate judge said appreciatively.
“He’s a dangerous adversary.”
“Hugo Müller found guilty by twelve votes,” the
presiding judge marveled. “Who would have thought it!
Klapka got him after all. For him it’s like a hunt or a game
of chess. He is totally consumed by his cases — My friend, I
wouldn’t want to have him as my enemy.”
“He likes it,” the associate judge replied, “when people
fear him.”
“A touch complacent, that’s him,” the presiding judge
said thoughtfully. “But he has astonishing determination . . .
chiefly for success. A great strength, friend, but — ” The
appropriate words failed him. “Well, let’s go have dinner.”
39
The Mystery of Handwriting
“Rubner,” said the editor-in-chief, “go have a look at that
graphologist, Jensen. He’s giving a performance for the press
crowd tonight; they say he’s really something phenomenal,
this Jensen. Then write me fifteen lines about it.”
“Right,” muttered Rubner, with the reluctance appropriate
to his calling.
“And make sure it isn’t some kind of swindle,” the
editor stressed emphatically. “As far as possible, I want it
checked personally. That’s why I’m sending you, an old hand
— ”
“ — — and so, gentlemen, these are the basic principles of
the science properly called psychometric graphology.” Thus
Jensen concluded his theoretical explanation to the press that
evening. “As you see, the entire system is built upon purely
empirical conclusions; although, to be sure, the practical
application of the precise method is so immensely complex
that I can’t give a more detailed demonstration in this one
lecture. I shall limit myself to a practical analysis of two or
three handwriting samples, rather than expound on the
theoretical aspects of my step-by-step procedure; we haven’t
time for that tonight, I’m sorry to say. May I please have a
handwriting sample of some sort from one of you gentlemen?”
Rubner, who had been waiting for this moment, immediately
handed the great Jensen a sheet of paper filled with
writing. Jensen donned his wonder-working eyeglasses and
inspected it.
40
“Aha, a woman’s hand,” he said wryly. “Ordinarily a
man’s hand is more pronounced and interesting, but then —
” Mumbling something to himself, he gazed intently at the
sheet of paper. “Hm, hm,” he said after a moment, twisting
his head; there was a deep silence.
Suddenly the graphologist asked, “This wasn’t written
by someone close to you, by any chance?”
“No, of course not,” Rubner protested quickly.
“So much the better,” said the great Jensen. “Listen,
this woman lies! That is the first impression I get from her
hand-writing: lying, habitual lying, lying as her fundamental
means of expression. Besides, she is basically a very lowclass
person; an educated man wouldn’t have much to talk
about with her — — She is appallingly sensual; her letters
have an almost fleshy shape. And she’s astoundingly sloppy;
her house must look — well, you can imagine. Those are the
primary traits which I discussed earlier; what you first notice
about a person, the external habits, that is to say, characteristics,
which are expressed instantly and instinctively. A
proper psychological analysis proceeds only from those
characteristics which the person in question denies or represses
— as he must; otherwise he would be at the mercy
of his environment.
“For example,” he said, placing his finger at the tip of
his nose, “this person probably would not admit her innermost
thoughts to anyone. She is superficial, but superficial in
two senses: on the surface it appears that she has many
rather pedestrian interests, but these only mask what she is
really thinking; and this secret ego is in itself terribly unimaginative.
I would say lewdness dominated by mental
indolence. Look at this, for instance: up to this point, the
handwriting is unpleasantly sensual — this is also a sign of
extravagance — and then it becomes repulsively priggish;
this person is too fond of her own comfort to actually seek
out any adventure of the senses; of course, when the opportunity
presents itself — But that isn’t our concern.
41
“Uncommonly self-indulgent and loquacious, too. When
she actually does accomplish something, she talks about it
endlessly, day and night — She’s much too occupied with
herself; you can see she doesn’t care about anyone else; it’s
only for her own convenience that she clings to someone and
wants him to believe that she loves him, that only God
Himself knows how she worries about him. A man’s a
weakling with a woman like this; he simply dissolves in
weakness from the boredom, the endless chatter, all that
humiliating materialism.
“Notice how the beginnings of the words and especially
of the sentences are written: rather lightly, almost slapdash.
This person wants to rule the roost and, in fact, she does;
not through any drive on her part, just a pretense of importance
and lots of talk; if necessary, she resorts to the vilest
tyranny of all, the tyranny of tears.
“This is odd: after each upward stroke you see a noticeable,
almost languid downturn; something is hindering this
person, something frightens her — most likely the fear of
disclosing something that might threaten her material comfort;
it must be something very embarrassing and concealed
with care; hm, I don’t know, perhaps something from the
past. But after this reaction she regains her strength, or
rather goes back to her usual ways, and she finishes her
words conventionally — though with that customary selfsatisfied,
rambling sweep at the end; her vanity is already on
the increase again.
“You remember that our first impression in this analysis
was mendacity. At the same time, gentlemen, you see how a
more detailed analysis ultimately confirms that first, general,
somewhat intuitive impression; this ultimate confirmation is
what I call methodical verification. — I originally said, ‘a
low-class person;’ but this is not the crudeness of an uncouth
person, however inconsistent that may seem. No, this handwriting
is a sham; it pretends very prettily to be something
other than it really is, but it does so for the most trivial
42
reasons. This woman pays great attention to trivial details,
to ‘correctness’: she painstakingly puts dots over all her i’s,
but the really important matters she disregards completely;
no self-discipline, no morals; in a word, a sloven.
“Most striking of all are her commas: her handwriting
has a natural slant to the right, but her commas curve in the
opposite direction. This gives the curious impression of a
knife wound in the back. There is something very deceitful
and malicious about this. I could say, figuratively speaking,
that this person is capable of stabbing a man in the back;
but given her love of comfort — and lack of imagination —
she wouldn’t do it. — I think that will suffice. Does someone
have another, more interesting sample?”
That night Rubner came home looking like a thundercloud.
“Home at last,” Mrs. Rubner said. “Did you eat supper
somewhere?”
Rubner glared at her. “Starting in again, are you?” he
muttered darkly.
Mrs. Rubner raised her eyebrows in surprise. “What do
you mean, am I starting in again? I only asked if you
wanted supper.”
“See?” Rubner replied with contempt. “That’s about all
you can talk about, shoveling in food. One of your pedestrian
in- terests. It’s so humiliating, so boring, the endless
chatter, the materialism — ” Rubner sighed and gestured
hopelessly. “I know only too well how they sap a man’s
strength.”
Mrs. Rubner placed her sewing in her lap and stared
attentively at him. “Franci,” she said in an anxious voice,
“did something unpleasant happen to you?”
“Aha,” Rubner burst out sarcastically. “There you go,
always so worried about me, right? Don’t think you can get
me to believe that! Listen, once a man sees through all those
lies, once he realizes how somebody clings to him just for
43
her own comfort . . . and out of pure sensuality. For
shame!” Rubner roared. “It’s enough to make a man sick!”
Mrs. Rubner shook her head and seemed about to say
something, but instead she pressed her lips together and
hastily resumed her sewing.
“Just look at this,” Rubner hissed after a moment, and
he glanced meaningfully around the room. “Disorder,
slovenliness — In trivial details like this, of course, everything
looks oh-so-tidy and ‘correct;’ but in really important
matters — What are you doing with those rags?”
“I’m mending your shirts,” Mrs. Rubner got out
through her constricted throat.
“You’re mending shirts,” Rubner sneered. “So, you’re
mending shirts! It’s understood, isn’t it, that the whole world
will be hearing about this! It’ll have to be talked about night
and day, that somebody’s mending shirts! There’ll be a big
fuss about how important it is! And you think because of
this you rule the roost around here? Well, let me tell you,
it’s going to stop right now!”
“Franci,” Mrs. Rubner gasped in astonishment, “have I
done something wrong?”
“How should I know?” Rubner snapped. “I have no
idea what you’ve done; I don’t know what you think or
what you’re up to; I don’t know anything about you, absolutely
nothing at all, because you keep everything to yourself!
God only knows about your past!”
“That’s enough,” Mrs. Rubner flared. “Stop right there.
If you say one more — ” She controlled herself with effort.
“Franci,” she said in horror, “what’s happened to you?”
“Aha!” Rubner declared triumphantly, “now we have it!
What are you so scared of? Maybe something will turn up
and threaten your comfy little life, is that it? But we know:
even with all her creature comforts she still finds opportunities
for little adventures, right?”
Mrs. Rubner sat as if turned to stone. “Franci,” she
blurted out, swallowing tears, “if you’re holding some kind
44
of grudge against me . . . then for heaven’s sake tell me
what it is!”
“Absolutely nothing,” Rubner intoned with overpowering
irony. “I hold absolutely no grudge against you whatsoever!
Why should it matter if a man’s wife has no selfdiscipline,
no morals; if she’s a chronic liar; if she’s slovenly,
lazy, wasteful, and appallingly sensual! And on top of all
that a low-class — ”
Mrs. Rubner broke into sobs and stood up, shedding
her sewing onto the floor.
“Put a sock in it,” her husband snarled with contempt.
“That’s the vilest tyranny of all, the tyranny of tears!”
But Mrs. Rubner was no longer listening; choking and
convulsed with tears, she had flung herself into her bedroom.
Rubner howled with tragic laughter and poked his head
through the doorway. “You’re even capable of knifing a man
in the back,” he shrieked, “but you love your creature
comforts too much to do it!”
The following evening Rubner dropped in at his neighborhood
tavern.
“I’ve just been reading in your paper here about this
wonderful graphologist, Jensen,” Mr. Plecka welcomed him,
peering over his spectacles. “Is there anything to it, Mr.
Newspaperman?”
“There is,” Rubner said, “and plenty. Would it be
possible to get a piece of that roast, Mr. Jancik? But not too
well done. Listen, he’s phenomenal, this Jensen; I saw him
last night. The way he analyzes handwriting is absolutely
scientific.”
“Then it’s a fake,” stated Mr. Plecka. “Mister, I’ll
believe anything except science. You take vitamins, for
instance: as long as there wasn’t any vitamins, a man at
least knew what he was eating; and now you don’t even
45
know what kind of vital factors you’ve got right there in
your roast,” Mr. Plecka said in disgust. “Ugh.”
“This is different,” Rubner declared. “It would take too
long to explain to you all about psychometrics, automatism,
primary and secondary characteristics, and things like that,
Mr. Plecka. But I can tell you this: that man reads handwriting
like he’s reading a book. And the way he describes a
man from top to bottom, you can just about see him standing
in front of you; he can tell you what’s he’s like, all about
his past, what he’s thinking, what he’s hiding, everything! I
was right there, mister!”
“Go on,” Mr. Plecka grumbled skeptically.
“Let me tell you about this one case,” Rubner began.
“One man — I won’t mention his name, but he’s very well
known — one man gave Jensen a sheet of paper with his
wife’s handwriting on it. And this Jensen took one look at it
and started right in: This woman’s a liar through and
through, sloppy, disgustingly sensual and frivolous, lazy,
wasteful, a non-stop talker, she gives the orders at home,
she’s got a wicked past, and to top it all off she wants to
murder her husband! — You can bet that man turned white,
because it was the actual truth, word for word. Just imagine,
he’d been living with her happily for twenty years and
hadn’t suspected a thing! In twenty years of marriage with
this woman he hadn’t seen one-tenth of what Jensen saw at
first glance! That’s quite a feat, you have to admit. Mr.
Plecka, that ought to convince even you!”
“What amazes me,” Mr. Plecka said, “is that for twenty
years this idiot, this husband, didn’t notice a thing.”
“Please,” Rubner said hurriedly, “when this woman had
play-acted so cleverly, and this man was otherwise very
happy with her — A man who’s that happy is blind. And
then, too, he didn’t have these exact scientific methods. So
there you have it: something may seem white to your eyes,
but to a scientist it’s all the colors of the rainbow. Experience,
my friend, doesn’t mean a thing; these days you’ve got
46
to know exact methods. You’re amazed that this unnamed
fellow didn’t even suspect that he was sharing his home with
a monster; well, he simply didn’t apply scientific methods to
her, that’s what it is.”
“And now he’s getting a divorce?” Mr. Jancik, the
owner, joined in the conversation.
“I don’t know,” Rubner replied carelessly. “I’m not
interested in such foolishness. I’m only interested in how this
Jensen figured out from her handwriting what nobody else
even suspected. You think you know someone for years on
end as a good and decent person, and then all at once, pow!
you find out from his handwriting that he’s a thief or a
snitch. No, a man should never take anyone at face value;
only an analysis like this can show what’s really going on
inside!”
“But if that’s true,” Mr. Plecka wondered uneasily,
“you’d be scared to write anything to anybody.”
“Right,” replied Rubner. “Just think of what graphological
science will mean for criminology, for instance. Why,
they could lock a man up before he ever stole a thing; his
handwriting would show he’s got a secondary trait for
swiping stuff, and pow! he’s off to the slammer! This has a
fantastic future. Like I tell you, it’s a proven science, there’s
not the least doubt about it.” Mr. Rubner glanced at his
watch. “Uh oh, ten o’clock; I really ought to be home.”
“Why so early tonight?” Mr. Plecka grumbled.
“Well, you know,” Rubner said sheepishly, “the wife
might start complaining that I’m always leaving her by
herself.”
47
Proof Positive
“You know, Tonik,” examining magistrate Mates said to his
closest friend, “it’s a matter of experience; I don’t believe
any alibis, any excuses, or any idle chatter; I don’t believe
the accused or the witnesses. People lie, even when they
don’t mean to. You get a witness swearing to you that he
doesn’t harbor any animosity towards the accused, and even
while he’s saying it he’s completely unaware that, in the
depths of his soul, in his subconscious, he hates him because
of some repressed jealousy or resentment. Everything the
accused tells you has been thought through and cleverly
concocted in advance; everything a witness tells you is
driven by the conscious or even unconscious intent to help
or harm the accused. This I know, friend: people are flat-out
mendacious bastards.
“Then what can we believe in? In chance, Tonik; in
those involuntary, unwitting or, I might say, uncontrollable
impulses or actions or words that people let slip every now
and then. Everything can be faked or prearranged, everything
is a smokescreen or a scam, everything but chance;
you can spot it right off the bat. Here’s my method: I simply
sit there and let people babble on about whatever they’ve
invented and organized beforehand; I pretend to believe
them, I even encourage them so they’ll babble more and
better, and I lie there in wait until they blurt out some tiny,
involuntary, unintentional word; a man has to be a psychologist,
you know. Some examining magistrates employ
tactics for befuddling the accused; that’s why they keep
interrupting and flustering him, and in the end, the poor,
dazed rabbit’s ready to confess, if need be, to the murder of
48
the Empress Elizabeth. I want to be absolutely certain; that’s
why I wait, slowly and patiently, until this systematic lying
and equivocation that the experts call testimony produces a
tiny, inadvertent gleam of truth. In this vale of tears, you
know, pure truth emerges only through oversight, only when
a human being somehow makes a slip of the tongue or some
other kind of blunder.
“Listen, Tonik, I don’t have any secrets from you; we’ve
been friends since boyhood — you’ll remember, I know, how
they gave you a licking when I was the one who broke that
window. I wouldn’t tell this to anyone else, but there’s
something I’m so ashamed of that I’ve got to get it out;
there’s no use denying it, people need to confess. I’m going
to tell you how well this method of mine worked just
recently in my . . . in my most private life; in short, in my
marriage. And then you can tell me, if you wish, that I was
a fool and a cad. I deserve it.
“Well, old friend, I . . . yes, I was suspicious of my
wife, Marta; in fact, I was insanely jealous. I got it into my
head that she was carrying on with that . . . with that young
. . . I’ll call him Artur; I don’t think you know him. Wait,
I’m not a savage; if I’d known for certain that she loved
him, I’d have said, Marta, let’s go our separate ways. But
the worst of it was, I didn’t know for certain; Tonik, you
have no idea what kind of torment that is. My God, it was
a nasty year! You know the kind of stupid tricks a jealous
husband will pull: he shadows his wife, he spies on her, he
eavesdrops, he makes scenes . . . But keep in mind that I
am, as chance would have it, an examining magistrate;
believe me, friend, my home life for the past year was one
continuous cross-examination from morning till . . . till
bedtime.
“The accused, I mean, Marta, acquitted herself splendidly.
Even when she cried, even when she was offended and
fell silent, even when she testified as to where she’d been all
day and what she’d been doing, I watched and waited in
49
vain for her to make some slip of the tongue, to somehow
give herself away. Of course, she often lied to me, I mean,
she lied from habit, but women do that routinely; a woman
will never tell you candidly that she spent two hours at the
dressmaker’s — she’ll make it seem that she was at the
dentist’s, or at the cemetery visiting her mother’s grave. The
more I hounded her — Tonda, a jealous man is worse than a
rabid dog — the more I bullied her, the less certain I was.
Each word she uttered, each excuse she made I picked at,
poked, and probed ten times over; but I found nothing more
than the usual, deliberate half-truths and half-lies that, as
we’re both well aware, constitute normal human relationships,
and marriage in particular. I know how I felt after all
that; but when I think of what poor Marta must >have gone
through, my friend, I wish I could bite my tongue off.
“Well, Marta went off to Frantiskovy Lazne this year —
the spa there specializes in women’s ailments, you know, and
the fact is, she wasn’t looking at all well. Needless to say, I
had her watched — I paid this shady character to do it,
though all he really did was make the rounds of the taverns
there . . . It’s odd how your entire life is tainted when only
one part of it goes awry; you may only have a stain in one
small spot, but your entire body feels unclean. Marta wrote
to me . . . somewhat hesitantly and timidly . . . as if she
couldn’t understand what had gone wrong; naturally >I
scrutinized her letters carefully and searched between the
lines . . . And then one day I got a letter from her that was
addressed to ‘Frantisek Mates, Examining Magistrate’ and so
forth, and when I opened the envelope and took out her
letter, the first thing I saw was: ‘Dear Artur’!
“I tell you, friend, my hands were shaking. So here it
was at last. Sometimes it does indeed happen that, when
you’ve been writing several letters, you pop some of them
into the wrong envelopes. It was pure, idiotic chance, wasn’t
it, Marta? As for me, friend, I felt sorry for her, revealing
her hand to me like that.
50
“Don’t misunderstand me, Tonik, my first instinct was
to not read the letter meant for this . . . this Artur, but to
send it right back to Marta; in any other circumstance, that’s
exactly what I would have done. But jealousy is an ugly
passion and it makes you do ugly things. I read that letter,
friend, and I’ll show it to you, because I carry it around
with me. Take a look at it:
Dear Artur,
Please don’t be angry with me for not having answered
your letter until now, but I’ve been worried because Franci
[that’s her nickname for me] hadn’t written for such a long
time. I know he’s really busy, but after having gone so long
without any news from my husband, I was walking around
like a lost soul. You wouldn’t understand that, Artur, but it’s
true. Anyway, Franci’s coming here next month, so perhaps
you could come, too. He writes that he’s working on a really
interesting case right now; he didn’t say which one, but I
think it’s the Hugo Müller murder case; I can’t wait to hear
about it. I’m sorry that you and Franci haven’t seen much of
each other lately, but that’s only because he’s been really busy
lately. If things had been like they used to be, you could have
gotten him out and about more with other people or taken
him for rides in your car. You were always so kind to us and
you haven’t forgotten us even now, even though things have
changed; Franci is so nervous now, he’s just not himself. But
you haven’t even told me what your girlfriend is doing. Franci
complains, too, that it’s really hot in Prague; he ought to
come here and unwind, but I’m sure he’s working in his office
till late at night. When are you going to the seashore? I hope
you take your girlfriend with you; you have no idea what it’s
like for a woman to miss someone. With best wishes,
Sincerely yours,
Marta Matesova
“Well, Tonik, what do you think of that? I know it’s
not brilliant correspondence; it’s a pretty feeble effort in
terms of style and subject matter. But, my dear friend, what
51
a light it throws on Marta and her relationship with that
wretched Artur! I’d never have believed her if she had told
me how she felt; but here in my >hand was something so
inadvertent on her part, so spontaneous . . . So you see that
truth, unequivocal and irrefutable truth, is revealed only as a
result of oversight. I could have cried for joy — and also
shame, at having been so idiotically jealous.
“What did I do then? Why, I tied a string around the
documents on the Hugo Müller murder case, locked them in
a drawer, and the next day I was in Frantiskovy Lazne.
When Marta saw me, her face turned pink and she stammered
like a little girl; she looked as if she had done something
quite outrageous. I kept a straight face. ‘Franci,’ she
said after a moment, ‘did you get my letter?’
“‘What letter?’ I asked in surprise. ‘God knows you
hardly ever write me.’
“Marta looked at me in a startled way and sighed as if
a load had lifted from her mind. ‘Then I must have forgotten
to mail it,’ she said, and she fumbled around in her
purse until she came up with a somewhat crumpled letter.
Dear Franci, it began. I couldn’t help laughing to myself. By
now, most likely, Artur’s already sent back the letter that
wasn’t meant for him.
“After that, not another word was said about the
matter; needless to say, I began to tell her about the Hugo
Müller case, which interested her so much. I think that to
this very day she believes I never received that letter.
“And that’s everything; since then there’s at least been
peace in our little family. But go ahead and say it, wasn’t I a
fool to be so despicably jealous? Now, of course, I’m trying
to make up for how I treated Marta; it wasn’t until I saw
her letter that I realized how much the poor girl worries
about me. At any rate, it’s off my mind now. A man’s more
ashamed of his foolishness than he is of his sins.
“But it’s a classic case of how something can be proved
beyond a doubt by pure and simple chance, isn’t it?”
52
* * *
At almost that very same moment, the young man referred
to herein as Artur said to Marta: “Well, my pet, did it
work?”
“What, sweetheart?”
“That letter you pretended to send by mistake.”
“It worked,” said Marta, and then she lapsed into
thought. “You know, darling, I’m almost ashamed at how
really desperately Franci believes me now. Ever since then
he’s been so nice to me . . . He carries that letter around
with him next to his heart.” Marta shivered slightly. >“It’s
really frightful the way I’m . . . I’m deceiving him, don’t you
think?”
But Artur didn’t think so; at least he said that he most
decidedly did not.
53
The Experiment of Professor Rouss
(The expatriot professor, in addressing his Czech audience, finds that
he has not only lost his former command of that language, but is
reduced to expressing certain thoughts in English — albeit a
frequently awkward and often Czech-influenced English. His
linguistic stumbles are indicated by the italicized words and phrases.
—Translator)
Especially notable among those in the audience were: the
Minister of the Interior, the Minister of Justice, the Chief of
Police, a row of Parliament members, several other high
government officials, prominent lawyers, eminent scholars
and, of course, members of the press, for they must be
present at everything.
“Gentlemen,” began Professor C. G. Rouss of Harvard
University, our famous American compatriot, “the experiment
I will show you has roots on the previous work of a
long line of my learned colleagues and collaborators; indeed,
there isn’t anything new in the whole thing, and, er, really,
it’s . . . it’s an old hat!” he burst out cheerfully, having
recalled the right words. “Only this method uses and, er,
and the practical applying of some theoretical experiences,
this was the goal for my work. I ask the best criminal
experts to judge this thing according to their own practice.
Well.
“The whole thing is this: I tell you a word, and you
must tell me another word, the one that hits you that very
moment, even if it is nonsenze, er, rubbish, I mean, nonsense.
And in the end I will tell you, according to the words
you tell me, what you have in your head, what you are
thinking about and, er, and what you are hiding. Do you
understand it? I will not explain it to you theoretically; these
54
are associations, repressed notions, a little suggesce and
things like that. I will be very short: you must — er, well,
cut off your will power and thinking; subconscious connectiony
will come loose, and I will know from this what —
what — ” The famous professor groped for words. “Well,
what’s on the bottom of your mind.”
“What’s on the bottom of your mind,” someone
prompted from the audience.
“Exactly,” C. G. Rouss said with satisfaction. “You
must only say automatically what at that moment comes to
your tongue, without all control and rezervationy. My
businys will then be to analyzovat your notions. That’s all.
So I want to show you this on a criminal kaze, er, case, and
then on somebody out of the audience what will volunteer.
Well, Mr. Chief of Police will tell us what is the kaze of this
man. Please, then.”
The police chief rose and said, “Gentlemen, the man
you will see in a moment is Cenek Suchanek, a farmer and
journeyman locksmith from Podunk. We’ve had him under
arrest for a week as a suspect in the murder of Josef
Cepelka, a cab driver who has been missing for fourteen
days. The reasons for our suspicions are that the missing
Cepelka’s car was found in the suspect Suchanek’s garage,
and traces of human blood were found on the steering wheel
and under the driver’s seat. The suspect, of course, denies
the charge; he claims he bought the car from Cepelka for six
thousand, because he himself wanted to go into the taxicab
business.
“We found out that the missing Josef Cepelka had
actually talked about being fed up with everything, and that
he was going to sell his old car and go somewhere else as a
driver; but there is no trace of him after that. Because there
is no further evidence, the suspect Suchanek will be brought
before an examining magistrate tomorrow. I asked permission
to bring him here so that our esteemed compatriot,
Professor C. G. Rouss, could conduct his experiment; if the
55
professor will continue . . . ”
“Well,” said the professor, who had been busily taking
notes, “you please will let him come in here now.”
At a sign from the police chief, an officer led in Cenek
Suchanek; he was a sullen fellow whose expression indicated
that they could all go to hell. As far as he was concerned, he
wasn’t going to yield an inch to anybody.
“Come here, you,” C. G. Rouss scolded him in a severe
tone of voice. “I will ask you nothing. I will only say a
word to you, and you must say immediately the first word
that occurs to you, understand it? So pay attention: glass.”
“Shit,” replied Mr. Suchanek.
“Listen, Suchanek,” the police chief said quickly, “if
you don’t answer decently, they’ll take you away for questioning
right now, understand? And they’ll keep you there all
night. So watch it! Now, once again!”
“Glass,” Professor Rouss repeated.
“Beer,” muttered Suchanek.
“So you see,” the renowned professor said, “how very
well it is going.”
Suchanek looked up suspiciously. Was there a catch to
this?
“Street,” said the professor.
“Cars,” Suchanek answered reluctantly.
“You must be quicker. Farmhouse!”
“Field.”
“Lathe!”
“Steel.”
“Very good.” It seemed that Mr. Suchanek no longer
objected to this game. “Mama!”
“Aunt.”
“Dog!”
“Doghouse.”
“Soldier!”
“Gunner.” So it went, blast after blast, faster and faster.
Most likely Mr. Suchanek was beginning to enjoy it; it
56
reminded him of trumping cards. God, the memories this
game sent flitting through his mind!
“Travel!” C. G. Rouss threw out at a breathless pace.
“Road.”
“Prague!”
“Beroun.”
“Hide!”
“Bury.”
“Scrub!”
“Stains.”
“Rag!”
“Sack.”
“Shovel!”
“Garden.”
“Hole!”
“Fence.”
“Corpse!”
Nothing.
“Corpse,” the professor repeated insistently. “So, you
buried him by the fence, did you?”
“I didn’t say nothing,” Mr. Suchanek burst out.
“You buried him by the fence in your garden,” C. G.
Rouss repeated sternly. “You killed him on the road to
Beroun. You wiped off the bloud on the car with a gunnysack.
So what did you do with the gunnysack?”
“That’s not true,” shouted Suchanek. “I bought that car
from Cepelka! Nobody’s going to trap me . . . ”
“Hold it,” said Rouss. “I will ask the policemen to
please go there to see. It isn’t my businys. Take this man
out. Please, gentlemen, that only took seventeen minutes. It
was too quick. It was a silly kaze. More often it takes an
hour. So I would like, please, to take one of the gentlemen
here and I will give him some words. It will take lots longer,
because I don’t know what that gentleman has for a secret
— how do you say that?”
“A secret,” someone from the audience prompted.
57
“A secret,” rejoiced our eminent compatriot. “I know,
just like the name of Smetana’s opera. Let us take lots of
time for this gentleman to leak for us his nature, his past,
his most hidden ideazy.”
“Thoughts,” a voice from the audience prompted.
“Well. I ask you please, gentlemen, who will volunteer
to be analyzovat?”
There was a pause; someone guffawed, but no one
stirred.
“Please,” C. G. Rouss repeated. “It will not hurt, you
know.”
“You go, my dear colleague,” whispered the Minister of
the Interior to the Minister of Justice.
“Go up there as a representative of your party,” one
parliament member said as he nudged another.
“You’re a section chief, you do it,” a high official
prodded his colleague from another ministry.
It was already beginning to be somewhat embarrassing;
no one volunteered.
“Please, gentlemen,” the American scholar said for the
third time, “maybe you are scared that you will let your cat
out of a bag?”
At this the Minister of the Interior turned to those
seated in back of him and hissed: “One of you gentlemen
get on up there!”
In the rear of the auditorium someone coughed modestly
and stood up; he was a gaunt, somewhat shabbylooking
older man whose Adam’s apple was moving up and
down in agitation. “I — . . . ehm,” he said hesitantly, “when
nobody — so I thought I’d — more or less . . . ”
“Come here,” the great American authority interrupted
him, “and sit down. You must say what occurs to you first.
You must not think, you must spill it out mechanically, not
even you yourself know what. Do you understand it?”
“Yes, sir,” the willing guinea pig said, a bit ill at ease
before such a distinguished audience; then he cleared his
58
throat and blinked anxiously, like a student taking final
exams.
“Tree,” the man of letters fired at him.
“Stately,” the old fellow whispered.
“What, please?” the man of letters asked, somehow not
comprehending.
“Giant of the forest,” the man explained bashfully.
“Ah, yes. Street!”
“Street . . . a street in ceremonial array,” offered the
little man.
“What do you mean?”
“A procession, sir. Or a funeral.”
“So. So all you have to say is ‘procession.’ Only one
word, if possible.”
“Yes, sir.”
“So then: business.”
“Flourishing. Business crisis. Business as usual. Politics
as usual. Shady business.”
“Hm. Office.”
“Please, sir, what kind?”
“It doesn’t matter. Just tell a word, quickly!”
“Perhaps if you’d say ‘agency’ . . . ”
“Well. Agency!”
“Authorized,” the little man blurted out with pleasure.
“Hammer!”
“Force. They extracted a confession by force. His head
was smashed in with a hammer.”
“Curious,” the scholar muttered. “Blood!”
“Blood money. Blood innocently shed. History written
in blood.”
“Fire!”
“By fire and sword. The valiant fireman. A fiery speech.
Mene tekel.”
“This is a strange kaze,” the professor said perplexedly.
“Once more. You must say only your first idea, do you
understand? Only what automatically comes to mind when
59
you hear the word. Go on. Hand!”
“The hand of friendship. Helping hand. Hands clutching
the flag. With clenched fists. With dirty hands. He got his
hands slapped.”
“Eyes!”
“The watchful eye of the public. Pull the wool over
their eyes. Eyewitness. Throw off the blinders. Blind to the
truth. The innocent eyes of children. Cheated blind.”
“Not so much! Beer!”
“Small beer. High spirits. Demon rum.”
“Music!”
“Music of the spheres. They played to beat the band. A
nation of musicians. Dulcet tones. The great powers acted in
concert. The gentle pipes of peace. Our glorious national
anthem.”
“Bottle!”
“Vitriol. Unrequited love. She died in the hospital in
terrible pain.”
“Poison!”
“Poison pen. Poisoning the well.”
C. G. Rouss scratched his head. “Never heard that.
Again, please. I want to make it clear to you, gentlemen,
that you always start from . . . er, from very plain, ordinary
things, so you find the main interest and profession of the
man. So then. Record!”
“Record time. Settle the record. Settle the score. Go
down in the records of history.”
“Hm. Paper!”
“Not worth the paper it’s printed on,” the little man
proclaimed energetically. “Official papers. Get it in down on
paper.”
“Bless you,” the scholar said irritably. “Stone!”
“The first to cast a stone. Tombstone. Rest in peace,”
the guinea pig responded warmly. “Ave, anima pia.”
“Car!”
“Triumphal car. The wheel of fate. Ambulance. A long
60
line of cars draped in black.”
“Aha!” exclaimed C. G. Rouss. “That’s it! Horizon!”
“Gloomy,” the old fellow said with lively delight. “New
clouds on the political horizon. His horizon is limited.
Widen your horizons.”
“Weapons!”
“Deadly weapons. Fully armed. They fought with flying
colors. Shot in the back,” the guinea pig gabbled enthusiastically.
“We won’t give up the fight. The roar of battle. Battle
of the ballot box.”
“Elements!”
“Raging elements. Elemental resistance. Criminal elements!
An element of mystery! An element of doubt! Elementary,
my — ”
“Enough,” C. G. Rouss restrained him. “You’re with a
newspaper, right?”
“Yes, sir,” the guinea pig replied passionately. “Have
been for thirty years. I’m Vasatko, the editor.”
“I thank you,” our famous American compatriot said
drily, and he bowed. “Finished, gentlemen. By analyzovat the
notions of this man we — er, we discover that he is a
journalist. I think it would be useless to do this experiment
more. It would only waste our time. I think this experiment
failed. So sorry, gentlemen.”
“Look at this,” Mr. Vasatko called out from his office that
evening, as he went through the papers on his desk. “The
police report that they found the body of Josef Cepelka; it
was buried by the fence in Suchanek’s garden, and underneath
it they found a bloodstained gunnysack. You know,
this Rouss hit the nail on the head after all! You won’t
believe this, but I didn’t say one word about newspapers,
and he pinpointed me squarely as a newspaperman. Gentlemen,
he said, you have here before you a prominent, respected
journalist — — Well, I wrote up his lecture for an
61
article: ‘The deductions of our renowned compatriot were
received with flattering acknowledgment in our professional
circle.’ Wait, I ought to put a little more style into it: ‘The
amazing deductions of our renowned compatriot were
received, as was their due, with lively and flattering acknowledgment
in our professional circle.’ That’s how it
should read.”
62
The Missing Letter
“Bozena,” the cabinet minister said to his wife, helping
himself to a substantial serving of salad, “I received a letter
this afternoon that will interest you. I’ll have to bring it up
at the cabinet meeting. But if it ever got out, a certain
political party would be in a very prickly plight. Here, see
for yourself,” he said, reaching first into his left vest pocket
and then into the right. “Wait, now what did I do with it?”
the minister muttered, poking his hand into his left vest
pocket again; whereupon he put down his fork and began
digging with both hands in the rest of his pockets. A careful
observer would have discovered that a cabinet minister has
the same surprising number of pockets, on every conceivable
side and surface of his body, as do ordinary men; and that
inside them he keeps pencils, notes, keys, the evening paper,
official documents, toothpicks, old letters, matches, ticket
stubs, his coin purse, his fountain pen, his pocket watch,
pocket knife, pocket comb, and countless other indispensable
everyday objects; and that in fumbling through his pockets,
a cabinet minister mumbles, “Now where did I put that?”
and “I must be crazy,” and “Wait a minute,” just as would
any other human creature rummaging through his pockets.
But the man’s wife was not devoting a great deal of attention
to this activity, for she said, as any other wife would
have done, “Look, you’d better eat; your dinner’s getting
cold.”
“Right,” the minister said, putting the contents of his
pockets back in their authorized places, “I probably left it
on the desk in my study; that’s where I was reading it. Can
you imagine,” he continued in great spirits, helping himself
63
to a slice of the roast, “can you imagine somebody sending
me an actual, authentic letter from — Just a second,” he
said uneasily, and he got up from the table. “I’ll just take a
look in the study. I probably left it on the desk.” And he
was gone.
When after ten minutes he had not yet returned, Bozena
went looking for him. The minister was sitting on the floor
in the middle of his study examining, page by page, the
papers and letters which he had removed from his desk.
“Would you like me to reheat your dinner?” she asked,
with only a trace of annoyance.
“Right away. In just a minute,” the minister answered,
preoccupied. “I probably mislaid it somewhere among my
papers. It would be silly if I couldn’t find it . . . But that’s
not possible. It has to be here somewhere.”
“Eat first,” his wife advised, “and then look for it.”
“Right away, right away,” the minister said peevishly.
“The minute I find it. It was in a sort of yellow envelope —
Well then, I am crazy,” he fumed, starting on the next stack
of papers. “I read it right here at my desk, and I didn’t
move from this spot until you called me to dinner — Now
where could I have put it?”
“I’ll send your dinner in here,” his wife decided, and
she left the minister still sitting there amidst his piles of
papers. Then complete silence settled in, while outside trees
rustled and stars fell. It was almost midnight when Bozena
began to yawn and then to head cautiously for a look in the
study.
The minister, minus his coat, disheveled and perspiring,
was standing in the center of the disorderly room. All about
him on the floor were heaps of papers, the furniture had
been dragged away from the walls, the rug was piled in one
corner, and on the desk sat his dinner, untouched.
“For heaven’s sake, man,” she exclaimed, “what are
you doing here?”
“Good God, can’t you leave me in peace?” the minister
64
snapped back. “Do you have to keep interrupting me every
five minutes?” Of course he immediately realized the injustice
of this and he added, in gentler tones, “I’ve got to do
this systematically, you understand. Inch by inch. It’s got to
be here somewhere, because no one else but me has set foot
in this room. If only I didn’t have so many damned documents
here!”
“Don’t you want me to help you?” she offered sympathetically.
“No, no, you’d just get it all mixed up,” the minister
fretted, gesturing towards the unspeakable disarray. “Go on
to bed, I’ll be there right away — ”
At three in the morning the minister got into bed,
sighing heavily. It just isn’t possible, he told himself: I
received that letter, in a yellow envelope, in the five o’clock
mail; I read it at my desk, where I continued to work until
eight o’clock; at eight I went into dinner, and less than five
minutes later I hurried back to search through the study.
Surely those five minutes couldn’t have been long enough for
anyone to — ”
At this the minister bailed out of bed, landed on both
feet, and dashed back to the study. True, the window was
open, but the study was on the second floor and, in addition,
the window faced the street — it’s hardly likely, the
minister supposed, that anyone could have entered unnoticed
through the window! But, he decided, I’ll need to check out
that angle in the morning.
Once again the minister deposited his stately form in
bed. Wait a minute, he suddenly thought, I remember reading
in some book that a letter like that usually goes unnoticed
when it’s lying right under your nose! Once again he
raced to the study, so that he might look and see what was
lying right under his nose; what he saw, of course, were
mounds of papers, wrenched-out drawers, and the vast,
hopeless confusion resulting from his search — cursing and
sighing, the minister returned, wide awake, to bed.
65
He held out until nearly six o’clock; at six he was
already demanding urgently over the telephone that his
colleague, the Minister of the Interior, be awakened immediately
“in this highly important matter, do you hear me!”
When at last the connection was made, he fired off frantically:
“Excuse me, sir, I beg of you, please send me at once
three or four of your most competent men . . . yes, detectives,
of course . . . your most dependable, it goes without
saying. I’m missing an extremely important document . . .
my dear sir, this is the most incomprehensible . . . Yes, I’ll
be waiting for them — Leave everything just as it is? Do
you really think that’s necessary? — Right. — Theft? I don’t
know — Of course, this is absolutely confidential; not a
word to anyone, you understand — Thank you, and forgive
me for . . . I’m deeply obliged to you, sir!”
By eight o’clock it turned out that the most competent
and most dependable men were seven in number, for seven
men in bowler hats presented themselves at the minister’s
door.
“You see, gentlemen,” the minister began, leading the
seven most competent men into his study, “last night, right
here in this room, I put down a certain . . . um, very important
letter . . . in a yellow envelope . . . addressed in violet
ink . . . ”
One of the seven most dependable men let out a
whistle. “He really tore the place up,” the man said with
professional admiration, “the damned swine.”
The minister stopped short. “Who exactly?”
“The thief,” the detective replied, scrutinizing God’s
own disaster in the study.
The minister turned weak pink in color. “Exactly,” he
said quickly. “Actually, I was a bit careless myself when I
was looking for it; yes, gentlemen, I . . . er, but I can’t
entirely rule out the letter being here somewhere . . . misplaced
or fallen behind something . . . I might even say that
it couldn’t be anywhere else but in this room. I think that . .
66
. yes, I could state with complete certainty that this room
has been examined systematically. But it is your affair now,
gentlemen, to undertake with . . . whatever is within human
capability.”
There are many things within human capability. Consequently,
three of the most competent men shut themselves up
in the study so as to examine it systematically; two more
questioned the maid, the cook, the housekeeper, and the
chauffeur; and the remaining two left for parts unknown of
the city in order to, as they put it, launch an investigation.
That evening, the first three of the most competent
announced that the letter being somewhere in the minister’s
study was now ruled out entirely, for they had gone so far
as to extract the pictures from their frames, take the furniture
apart, and catalog every sheet of paper. The next two
reported that only the maid had entered the room, when, at
the request of the minister’s wife, she had carried in the
dinner while the minister was seated on the floor; that she,
in turn, had carried out the letter could not be ruled out
entirely, and so an investigation had been launched as to
who her boyfriend was — he was an employee of the telephone
company and presently under their surveillance. The
remaining two were investigating somewhere in parts unknown.
That night the minister did not and could not fall
asleep, repeating incessantly to himself: at five o’clock that
letter in the yellow envelope arrived; I read it at my desk in
the study, and I didn’t leave the study until I went to dinner;
ergo, the letter must still be there — but it isn’t. He was
saddened and discomfited by this contradictory and altogether
impossible enigma, and so he took a sleeping pill and
slept like a log until morning.
In the morning he found that, inexplicably, only one of
the seven most competent was poking about the house; no
doubt the others were launching an investigation throughout
the entire republic.
67
“It’s moving right along,” the Minister of the Interior
informed him over the telephone, “and I expect to have a
report in no time. According to what you told me about the
contents of this letter, sir, we know only too well who would
have an interest in it . . . If we could get a search warrant
for a certain ministry, or better yet for a certain newspaper
office, we’d know still more; but, as I say, it’s moving right
along.”
About one o’clock that night — it was a clear, moonlit
night — Bozena heard footsteps in the library and, arming
herself with all the courage of a respectable woman, went
there on tiptoe. The library door was ajar, one of the bookcases
was open, and standing before it in his nightshirt was
the minister, leafing solemnly through the pages of one of
the volumes and mumbling softly all the while.
“For heaven’s sake,” she gasped, “what are you doing
now?”
“I just wanted to look something up,” the minister
replied vaguely.
“In the dark?” she wondered.
“I can see,” the minister insisted, and he put the book
back in its place. “Goodnight,” he said in a low voice, and
he went slowly off to bed.
Bozena shook her head. Poor man, she said to herself,
he can’t sleep for that wretched letter.
The next morning the minister looked rosy and wellnigh
content.
“Tell me, please,” his wife said, “what on earth were
you looking for in the library last night?”
The minister set down his spoon and opened his eyes
wide. “I? What’s got into your head? I wasn’t in the library.
I was sleeping like a hoopoe.”
“But I talked with you there! You were thumbing
through some book or other, and you said that you wanted
to look something up!”
“Nonsense,” the minister said in disbelief. “You must
68
have been dreaming. I didn’t budge once the entire night.”
“You were standing there by the middle bookcase,” she
continued, “and you hadn’t even turned on the lights. You
were thumbing through some book in the dark, and furthermore
you insisted that you could see very well.”
The minister clutched his head. “Woman,” he blurted
through clenched teeth, “are you suggesting that I’m a
sleepwalker? Never mind,” he added, composing himself,
“you were dreaming. I am not, I trust, a somnambulist!”
“It was one o’clock in the morning,” she maintained,
adding somewhat irritably, “Are you saying that maybe I’ve
lost my mind?”
The minister twirled his spoon thoughtfully in his tea.
“Wait a minute,” he said suddenly. “Show me where it
happened.”
His wife steered him to the library. “You were standing
right here by this bookcase, and you’d taken a book down
from that very shelf.”
The minister turned toward the shelf in bewilderment;
on it sat a complete and impressive set of the Collected
Laws and Statutes. “I’m the one who’s lost his mind,” he
muttered as he scraped his fingers along the row of books
and, almost mechanically, pulled out a volume which had
been replaced upside down. It fell open in his hand; tucked
inside was a yellow envelope addressed in violet ink.
“You know, Bozena,” the minister marveled, “I could have
sworn that I didn’t take one step from the study; but now I
dimly recall that after reading the letter I said to myself: I’ve
got to look up that statute from ‘thirty-three. I probably
took the book back to my desk to make a few notes; but
because the thing kept closing up again, I must have stuck
the letter in it and then later clapped the book shut and
automatically put it back in place — But that I would have
gone to this very book subconsciously, would have seen it in
69
my sleep, that’s — hm; best not to mention this to anyone.
People might very well think — It would give the wrong
impression, mysterious psychological phenomena and all
that.”
A moment later the minister was telephoning exuberantly
to his colleague at the Ministry of the Interior: “Good
morning, sir, now about that missing letter — No, of course
you haven’t found any traces yet; I’ve got it here in my
hand! . . . What’s that? How did I find it? My dear friend,
I’m not going to tell you. There are methods, you know, that
even the Ministry of the Interior is not aware of — I realize,
naturally, that your people did all they could; they can’t be
blamed for not being on top of everything — You’re quite
right, it’s best that we not mention it — Not at all, you’re
too kind . . . and a good day to you, too, sir!”
70
Stolen Document 139/VII, Sect. C
At three o’clock in the morning the telephone jangled at
garrison headquarters: “Colonel Hampl here, of the General
Staff. Send me two men from the military police immediately,
and tell Lieutenant Colonel Vrzal — yes, of course
from Intelligence, that’s no business of yours — tell him to
come here at once — Yes, now, tonight — Yes, get him a
car. And hurry, for God’s sake!” And with that he hung up.
An hour later Lieutenant Colonel Vrzal arrived at the
spot, which was God knows where in some garden suburb.
He was greeted by an older, badly worried gentleman in
civvies, that is, in shirt and trousers only. “Vrzal, the
damnedest thing happened to me. Sit down, sit down. The
damnedest, filthy, wretched, rotten, stupid thing. Vile, cursed
business. Imagine this, if you can: day before yesterday, the
head of General Staff hands me this document and says,
‘Hampl, you’d better deal with this at home; the fewer
people know about it, the better — don’t say a word about
it at the office. Now off with you, take a few days’ leave
and sit on this at home, but be on your guard!’ And so I
did.”
“What kind of document was it?” asked Lieutenant
Colonel Vrzal.
Colonel Hampl hesitated a moment. “Well,” he said,
“you might as well know: it was from Section C.”
“Aha,” Lieutenant Colonel Vrzal said meaningfully, and
his manner became exceedingly grave. “Go on.”
“Look,” said the miserable colonel. “I had it with me
all day yesterday, but what by all the sacraments was I
supposed to do with it at night? Stick it in the stamp
71
drawer? That’s no good, and I haven’t got a safe; and if
anybody knew I had it with me, that would be amen and
the end of it. So that first night I hid it under the mattress;
by morning it looked like a wild boar had been rolling
around on it.”
“I can believe it,” said Lieutenant Colonel Vrzal.
“What else would you expect?” the colonel sighed. “My
wife is even fatter than I am. Well, the second night my wife
gave me some advice: ‘I’ll tell you what,’ she said, ‘let’s put
it in the macaroni canister and hide it overnight in the
pantry. I’ll lock the pantry and keep the key with me,’ she
said — because we have this maid who’s even fatter, and
she’ll eat anything. Nobody would think of looking for it in
the pantry, right? Well, it seemed like a good idea to me.”
“Does your pantry have a single or a double window?”
Lieutenant Colonel Vrzal interrupted.
“By Jove!” the colonel exploded. “That never occurred
to me! It’s a single window! I was thinking the whole time
about the Sazava case and other such foolishness, and I
completely forgot to take a look at the window! Damned,
wretched business!”
“What happened next?” the lieutenant colonel urged.
“Well, what didn’t happen next. At two in the morning
my wife hears the maid screeching downstairs. So she goes
down to see what’s going on, and Mary’s yelling, ‘There’s a
burglar in the pantry!’ My wife dashes back for the key, and
me, I rush to the pantry with my pistol and — stupid,
damned business, the pantry window’s jimmied, forced open,
and the noodle can with the document is gone. And the
burglar’s gone, too. That’s all,” sighed the colonel.
Lieutenant Colonel Vrzal drummed his fingers on the
table. “And Colonel, sir, nobody knew you had this document
at home?”
The unhappy colonel threw up his hands. “I don’t
know. Those filthy spies snoop out everything.” Just then he
remembered Lieutenant Colonel Vrzal’s official position and
72
lapsed into embarrassed confusion. “What I mean to say is,
they are very clever people,” he corrected himself lamely.
“But I didn’t tell a soul about it, word of honor. However,”
he added triumphantly, “nobody could possibly have known
that I put it in the macaroni canister.”
“While we’re on the subject, where were you when you
put it in the canister?” the lieutenant colonel asked.
“Here, at this table.”
“Where exactly was the canister?”
“Wait,” the colonel reflected. “I was sitting here, and I
had the canister right in front of me.”
The lieutenant colonel leaned against the table and
stared out the window in dreamy thought. The red-and-gray
house opposite was silhouetted against the dawn. “Who lives
over there?” he asked idly.
The colonel banged on the table. “Damn it, I forgot all
about that! Wait, some kind of Jew lives there, a bank
director or something. Damned business, now I see what
happened! Vrzal, I think we’re on the track of something
here!”
“I’d like to see the pantry,” the lieutenant colonel said
evasively.
“Come on, then. This way, this way,” the colonel
guided him with eagerness. “Here it is. That can was on the
top shelf. Mary!” the colonel bawled. “What are you gaping
at? Go down in the cellar, or up in the attic!”
The lieutenant colonel put on his gloves and swung
himself up to the window, which was fairly high. “Forced
open with a chisel,” he said, examining the frame. “Of
course, the sill is made of softwood; colonel, sir, a boy could
have split it easily.”
“Damned business,” the colonel said, truly amazed.
“Damned people, making such wretched windows!”
Outside, two tin-soldier types were posted in front of
the fence.
“Is that the military police?” asked Lieutenant Colonel
73
Vrzal. “Good. I still need to take a look at the outside. But
Colonel, sir, I must caution you not to leave the house until
further orders.”
“Certainly,” the colonel agreed. “But why, exactly?”
“So that you’ll be available in case — The two soldiers
will remain here, of course.”
The colonel snorted and then swallowed something. “I
understand. Would you care for some coffee? My wife could
fix it for you.”
“There’s no time to spare,” the lieutenant colonel said
drily. “Meanwhile, of course, don’t say anything about the
stolen document to anyone, unless . . . unless you’re requested
to do so. And one more thing: tell your maid that
the burglar stole some canned goods, that’s all.”
“But listen,” the colonel called after him in desperation,
“you are going to find that document, aren’t you?”
“I’ll do my best,” Lieutenant Colonel Vrzal replied, and
he clicked his heels together, military style.
For the rest of the morning Colonel Hampl sat like a
small mountain of woe. At times he imagined two officers
arriving to arrest him; at other times he tried to visualize
somehow what Lieutenant Colonel Vrzal might be doing and
how he was probably setting in motion the vast and mysterious
apparatus of military intelligence. He frequently pictured
the alarm at general headquarters and moaned aloud.
“Karlous,” his wife said to him for the twentieth time
(prudently she had long before, in the early morning hours,
hidden his revolver in the maid’s trunk), “wouldn’t you like
a little something to eat?”
“Leave me alone, for God’s sake!” the colonel snapped.
“I think that Jew across the way must have seen me.”
His wife only sighed and went back to the kitchen to
cry.
At that moment the doorbell rang. The colonel stood up
and straightened his clothing, so that he might with proper
military dignity receive the officers coming to take him into
74
custody. (Which ones might they be? he wondered absently.)
But instead of officers, a small, ginger-haired man entered,
bowler hat in hand, smiling at the colonel like a toothy
squirrel. “Beg your pardon, but I’m Pistora from the police
station.”
“What do you want?” the colonel blurted out, inconspicuously
shifting from attention to at ease.
“They tell me your pantry’s been burgled,” Mr. Pistora
grinned in a somewhat confidential manner. “So I came on
by.”
“What the devil business is it of yours?” the colonel
bellowed.
“Beg your pardon,” Mr. Pistora beamed, “but this is
our bailiwick, you know. Your maid here, she was saying
this morning at the baker’s that your pantry got burgled,
and so I said to the captain, captain, sir, I’ll just drop on
by.”
“It wasn’t worth it,” the colonel snarled in dismissal.
“All they took was a . . . a box of macaroni. Kindly keep
out of it.”
“It’s funny,” Mr. Pistora remarked, “that they didn’t
make off with nothing more than that.”
“It’s very funny,” the colonel remarked bitterly, “but it’s
no business of yours.”
“Maybe somebody interrupted ‘em while they was at
it,” Mr. Pistora beamed again, in a sudden burst of enlightenment.
“Good day to you, sir,” said the colonel bluntly.
“Beg your pardon,” said Mr. Pistora, his smile a touch
mistrustful, “but I’ll have to take a look at that pantry
first.”
The colonel was ready to explode, but in his misery he
merely surrendered. “Come on then,” he said, fed up with it
all, and he led the little man to the pantry.
Mr. Pistora scanned the small, narrow closet with
enthusiasm. “Yes indeedy,” he said, looking quite pleased,
75
“window forced open with a chisel. That’ll be Pepek or
Andrlik.”
“What are you talking about?” the colonel asked
sharply.
“Why, it was either Pepek or Andrlik that did it; but
my guess is Pepek’s still doing time. Now if it was only the
glass pushed in, that would be Dundr, Lojza, Novak,
Hosicka, or Kliment. But this was Andrlik.”
“You’re never wrong, I suppose,” muttered the colonel.
“You think somebody new is doing pantries?” Mr.
Pistora suddenly grew solemn. “Don’t seem likely. Mertl,
now, he forces windows, too, but he never goes in through
pantries, never, sir; he busts in by the toilet and he only
takes linen and laundry.” Mr. Pistora displayed his squirrel’s
teeth anew. “Yes indeedy, I’ll just go look in on Andrlik.”
“Give him my best,” the colonel grumbled. It’s unbelievable,
he mused, when once again he was left to his melancholy
brooding, it’s unbelievable how incompetent these
policemen are. They could at least look for fingerprints or
footprints — that’s how a professional would handle things;
but to go about it in such an idiotic way — Imagine the
police bumbling around in international espionage! I’d like
to know what Vrzal is doing now.
The colonel could not resist the temptation and telephoned
Lieutenant Colonel Vrzal; after a half-hour of
fuming he finally managed to get through. “Hello,” his voice
rang out mellifluously, “Hampl here. I was just wondering
how long — I know, you can’t talk about it, but I only — I
know, but if you could just tell me whether there’s anything
— Good God, still nothing? — I know, it’s a difficult case,
but — Wait a minute, Vrzal, please. It’s occurred to me that,
out of my own pocket, you understand, I could offer ten
thousand to whoever catches the thief. That’s all I’ve got,
but you know what this means to me — I know it isn’t; but
as a purely private — Yes, exactly, my own private affair;
nothing official about it — Or you could split it with the
76
private detectives, how’s that? — I understand, you know
nothing about it; but if you could somehow let the men
know that Colonel Hampl’s promising ten thousand —
Right, have your sergeant pass the word — Not at all, don’t
mention it! — Sorry to have bothered you. And thanks.”
Colonel Hampl felt somewhat relieved by this generous
decision; he had the impression now of having made at least
some kind of personal contribution toward tracking down
the damned thieving spy. Exhausted by the excitement, he
lay down on the sofa and began to picture a hundred, two
hundred, three hundred men (all ginger-haired and baring
squirrel’s teeth like Mr. Pistora) inspecting trains, stopping
cars headed full speed toward the frontier, lying in wait for
their quarry on street corners, and then suddenly stepping
forward with the words: “In the name of the law, you’re
under arrest. Come with me and keep your big mouth shut.”
Then he dreamed that he was taking an examination in
ballistics at the military academy, and he groaned heavily
and woke up in a sweat. Someone had rung the doorbell.
Colonel Hampl sprang to his feet and tried to collect his
thoughts. Upon opening the door he found himself confronted
by the squirrel teeth of Mr. Pistora. “I’m back,” the
teeth announced. “Beg your pardon, sir, but he’s the one.”
The colonel struggled to understand. “Who?”
“Well, Andrlik,” said Mr. Pistora, for once failing to
display his array of teeth. “Who else? Pepek’s been put
away, just like I thought.”
“Why do you keep going on about this Andrlik?” the
colonel snapped impatiently.
Mr. Pistora rolled his bright little eyes. “But he’s the one
that stole the noodles from the pantry,” he said earnestly.
“They’ve got him down at the station house now. Beg your
pardon, but I’ve come to ask — Andrlik, see, he says there
wasn’t any noodles in that can, just a bunch of papers. So I
just wanted to know if that’s true.”
“Where,” the colonel shouted without pausing for
77
breath, “where’s that bunch of papers?”
“In my pocket,” beamed Mr. Pistora, baring his teeth.
“Now where did I — ” He rummaged through his baggy
jacket. “Aha. Is this yours?”
The colonel whipped from Pistora’s hand the precious,
rumpled Document 139/VII, Sect. C. His eyes flooded with
tears of relief. “My dear, dear fellow,” he exhaled, “I would
have given — never mind what — to have this back again.
Wife!” he roared, “come here! I want you to meet officer —
special agent — uh — ”
“Inspector Pistora,” the little man said, exhibiting, in
his great pleasure, his entire set of dentures.
“He’s found the stolen document!” the colonel trumpeted.
“Get the brandy and some glasses. Mr. Pistora, I’d . .
. you have no idea . . . I mean, if you only knew . . . Here’s
to you, Mr. Pistora!”
“Well, it wasn’t anything,” Mr. Pistora grinned. “That’s
strong stuff, sir! Oh, and that can, ma’am, that can’s down
at the police station.”
“Devil take the can,” the colonel roared blissfully. “My
dear Mr. Pistora, how did you find my papers so quickly?
Your health, Mr. Pistora!”
“And yours, sir,” Mr. Pistora said respectfully. “But my
Lord, sir, that wasn’t anything at all. If it’s pranks in the
pantry, we go for Andrlik or Pepek, but Pepek’s sitting out
two months in jail. If it’s upstairs, though, that’s either
Pisecky, Limping Tondera, Kaner, Zima, or Houska.”
“Oh my,” the colonel marveled. “But tell me, what if
it’s a case of spying, say? Cheers, Mr. Pistora.”
“Thank you kindly — As to spies, sir, we don’t get that
sort of thing, you know. Brass doorknobs, now, that’s Cenek
and Pinkus, and there’s only one who does copper wire, a
fellow named Tousek; and if it’s tavern fittings, that’s bound
to be Hanousek, Buchta, or Slesinger. We go straight to the
source, sir. As to safecrackers, why, we’ve got the name of
every safecracker in the republic. There’s — hic! there’s
78
twenty-seven of ‘em now, but six of ‘em’s put away.”
“Serves them right,” the colonel declared bloodthirstily.
“Drink up, Mr. Pistora!”
“Thank you kindly,” said Mr. Pistora, “but I’m not
much of a one for drinking. Beg your pardon, here’s to you,
sir. These here — hic! these here crooks aren’t very smart,
sir; they only know one trick, and they just keep at it till
somebody retires ‘em from business again. Like this Andrlik.
`Aha,’ he says when he sees me coming, `it’s Mr. Pistora
about that pantry. Mr. Pistora,’ he says to me, `it’s not worth
it no more, all I got was a bunch of papers in that can. I
had to pull out before I could grab anything else’ — `On
your feet, meatball,’ I says to him, `you’ll get at least a year
for this.’”
“A year in prison?” Colonel Hampl countered somewhat
sympathetically. “Isn’t that a bit much?”
“Well, it is breaking and entering, you know,” Mr.
Pistora grinned. “I do thank you kindly, sir; I still have a
busted shop window to see to, that’ll either be Klecka or
Rudl. But if you need anything else, just give us a call at the
station. Just ask for Mr. Pistora.”
“Please, sir,” the colonel said, “if perhaps — hm — for
your services — That is, those papers aren’t . . . That is,
they’re nothing special, but . . . I wouldn’t have wanted to
lose them, do you see? Here, if you’ll accept something for
your trouble,” he said all at once, and he shoved a fifty into
Mr. Pistora’s hand.
Mr. Pistora was surprised and touched. “Now, there’s
no need for that,” he said, quickly shoving the hand with
the banknote into his pocket. “It really wasn’t anything —
But I thank you kindly, sir; and if you ever need anything
again someday . . . ”
“The fact is, I gave him fifty,” Colonel Hampl said,
complacently, to his wife. “Twenty would have been plenty
for that tulip, but — ” The colonel waved his hand magnanimously.
“At least he found the damned thing.”
79
The Man Who Looked Just a Bit Suspicious
“Sergeant Kolda,” said Mr. Pacovsky, “I’ve got something
for you.” Mr. Pacovsky had been a policeman in Austrian
times, a mounted policeman actually, but after the war he
couldn’t get used to the new circumstances somehow, so he
took his pension, went off to have a look at the world, and
ended up as innkeeper of The Lookout Inn; true, it’s in a
somewhat remote area, but nowadays that kind of place is
beginning to be fairly popular, what with the excursions, the
views, swimming in the lake, and similar attractions. “Sergeant,”
said Mr. Pacovsky, “there’s something I can’t figure
out. I’ve had this one guest for fourteen days now, name of
Roedl. I don’t really know what it is, because he pays up,
doesn’t drink, doesn’t gamble, but . . . I’ll tell you what,”
Mr. Pacovsky said suddenly, “come over and take a look at
him some time.”
“What’s the matter with him?” asked Sergeant Kolda.
“That’s just it,” said Mr. Pacovsky, annoyed, “I don’t
know. It’s nothing you can really put your finger on, but —
How should I put it? The man looks just a bit suspicious to
me. Yes.”
“Roedl, Roedl,” Sergeant Kolda pondered. “The name
doesn’t tell me anything. What does he do?”
“I don’t know,” said Mr. Pacovsky. “He’s supposed to
be a bank clerk, but I can’t get out of him what bank he
works for. It looks just a bit suspicious to me. He’s polite
enough, but — And he never gets any mail, either. I have the
feeling he’s avoiding people. And it just looks a bit suspicious
to me.”
“How do you mean, he avoids people?” asked Sergeant
80
Kolda.
“He doesn’t exactly avoid them,” Mr. Pacovsky stated
uncertainly, “but . . . who on earth goes to the country in
September? And every time a car stops in front of the place
he goes up to his room, even when he’s in the middle of a
meal. Really, that’s what happens. I’m telling you, I don’t
like the looks of this Roedl one bit.”
Sergeant Kolda thought it over for a while. “You know
what, Mr. Pacovsky,” he proposed sagely, “maybe you could
tell him you close The Lookout up in the fall. Let him go to
Prague or some other place, that’s what you should do! Why
should we have to put up with him here? That’s what.”
The next day, Sunday, the young police officer Hurych,
nicknamed Dreamboat and Angelpuss, was going off duty;
on the way home it occurred to him to drop by the inn, and
he went straight from the woods to the rear courtyard of
The Lookout. When he reached the back gate, he stopped to
blow the ashes out of his pipe. At that very moment he
heard the rattle of a window on the second floor overlooking
the courtyard, and something thudded to the ground
behind him. Dreamboat raced into the yard and grabbed the
shoulder of a man who, for no reason at all, had leaped
from the window. “Sir,” he said disapprovingly, “what are
you doing?”
The man he was holding by the shoulder was pale and
expressionless. “Why shouldn’t I jump?” he replied faintly.
“I live here, don’t I?”
Officer Dreamboat studied the situation briefly. “Maybe
you do,” he said, “but your jumping from the window is
just a bit suspicious.”
“I didn’t know it was prohibited,” the expressionless
man apologized. “Ask Mr. Pacovsky if I don’t live here. My
name’s Roedl.”
“Maybe it is,” said Officer Dreamboat. “Show me your
papers.”
“Papers?” said Mr. Roedl hesitantly. “I don’t have any
81
papers with me. I’ll write away for them.”
“We’ll write away for them ourselves,” said Dreamboat
obligingly. “You come along with me, Mr. Roedl.”
“Where?” protested Mr. Roedl, his face ashen. “What
right . . . what right do you have to take me in?”
“Because there’s something just a bit suspicious about
you, Mr. Roedl,” Dreamboat declared. “You just hold your
tongue and come along with me.”
Sergeant Kolda was seated at the police station in his
bedroom slippers, smoking a long, old-fashioned pipe and
reading the police weekly. When he saw Dreamboat with
Mr. Roedl, he launched into a tirade: “My God, Dreamboat,
what are you doing to me? Can’t I have a little peace even
on Sunday? What are you hauling people in here for on a
Sunday?”
“Sergeant, sir,” announced Dreamboat, “this man looks
just a bit suspicious to me. When he saw me going into The
Lookout, he jumped out of a window into the courtyard and
tried to run off into the woods. And he doesn’t have any
papers, either. So I brought him in. He says his name’s
Roedl.”
“Well, well,” Sergeant Kolda said with interest. “Mr.
Roedl. So now we’ve got you, Mr. Roedl.”
“You can’t arrest me,” Mr. Roedl said uneasily.
“We can’t,” agreed Sergeant Kolda. “But we can keep
you here, can’t we? Dreamboat, hop on over to the inn, go
through Mr. Roedl’s room, and have his things brought here.
Take a seat, Mr. Roedl.”
“I . . . I refuse to make any statement whatsoever,”
stammered Mr. Roedl. “I’ll file a complaint . . . I protest— ”
“My God, Mr. Roedl,” Sergeant Kolda sighed, “you do
look just a bit suspicious! I’m not going to get into an
argument with you. Just sit over there and keep your trap
shut.” Whereupon he picked up his newspaper and went on
reading.
“You know, Mr. Roedl,” he said presently, “anybody
82
can see just by looking at you that something’s wrong. If I
were in your shoes I’d tell all, and then you’d have some
peace of mind. But if you don’t want to, well, that’s fine,
too.”
Mr. Roedl sat there, pale and bathed in sweat; Sergeant
Kolda studied him, snorting in annoyance, and then went to
turn the mushrooms that he was drying over the stove.
“Look here, Mr. Roedl,” he began again after a time,
“we’re going to check out your identity; and meanwhile
you’ll be sitting in custody and you won’t have anyone to
talk to. Don’t be pigheaded!”
Mr. Roedl persisted in stubborn silence, and Sergeant
Kolda, grumbling in disgust, cleaned his pipe. “All right,” he
said, “look at it this way: it’ll be maybe a month before we
find out who you are; but that month, Mr. Roedl, won’t
count towards your sentence. It’d be a shame to lose a
whole month of your sentence that way!”
“And if I confess,” said Mr. Roedl, wavering, “then... ”
“Then you’ll be remanded into custody, that’s what,”
Sergeant Kolda explained, “and that’ll count towards your
sentence. Do whatever you like. You look a bit suspicious to
me, and I’ll be glad when they turn you over to the district
court. That’s all there is to it, Mr. Roedl.”
Mr. Roedl sighed; in his shifty eyes appeared an expression
of sorrow and near exhaustion. “Why,” he asked,
wrenching out the words, “why does everyone say there’s
something a bit suspicious about me?”
“Because you look scared,” Sergeant Kolda replied
sensibly. “You’re hiding something, Mr. Roedl, and people
don’t like that. How come you never look anyone straight in
the eye? You’re uneasy. That’s what it is, Mr. Roedl.”
“Rosner,” the pale, dispirited man corrected him.
Sergeant Kolda thought it over. “Rosner, Rosner: wait a
minute, which Rosner? That name sounds familiar to me
somehow.”
“Ferdinand Rosner, of course,” the man blurted out.
83
“Ferdinand Rosner,” Sergeant Kolda repeated, “that
rings a bell. Ferdinand Rosner.”
“The Vienna Depository Bank,” the pale man prompted.
“Aha!” Sergeant Kolda exclaimed joyfully. “Embezzlement.
Now I’ve got it. Of course: Rosner! My dear man,
we’ve had a warrant out for you for the last three years! So
you’re Rosner,” he repeated with delight. “But why didn’t
you say so right away? Would you believe it, I came that
close to throwing you out the door, and you’re Rosner!
Dreamboat,” he trumpeted at Officer Hurych, who was just
coming in, “would you believe it, this is Rosner, the embezzler!”
“That’s me,” Rosner winced rather plaintively.
“There now, Rosner,” Sergeant Kolda comforted him,
“you’ll get used to it. Be happy that it’s finally out in the
open. But tell me, dear man, where in God’s name have you
been hiding out these past three years?”
“Hiding out,” said Rosner bitterly. “Either in sleeping
cars or high-priced hotels. Nobody there asks who you are
or where you’re from.”
“Oh my,” Sergeant Kolda sympathized, “your overhead
must have been enormous!”
“You can’t imagine how much,” Rosner said, beginning
to relax. “But I couldn’t very well go to the sort of place
that’s always being raided by the cops, could I? No, sir, I
had to keep on living above my means! I never stayed
anywhere longer than three nights, till now — and now
you’ve collared me.”
“Why, yes,” Sergeant Kolda said by way of consolation,
“but your money was already beginning to run out, wasn’t
it, Rosner? It would’ve all come to the same end.”
“It would have,” Rosner agreed. “But I tell you, I
couldn’t have kept it up much longer. You know, I haven’t
had a real heart-to-heart talk with anyone for three years,
till now! Why, I couldn’t even eat my meals in peace! As
soon as somebody started looking at me, I’d get out of there
84
fast . . . Everyone stared at me so strangely,” he moaned. “I
used to think everyone was from the police. Just imagine,
even Mr. Pacovsky!”
“Don’t you worry yourself about that,” Sergeant Kolda
said. “What I mean is, Mr. Pacovsky really was a policeman
once.”
“You see?” Rosner grumbled. “And you expect somebody
like me to escape notice? But why did everyone stare
at me so strangely? Do I look like some kind of criminal?”
Sergeant Kolda looked him over thoughtfully. “I’ll tell
you something, Rosner,” he said, “not now you don’t; now
you look just like everybody else. But you used to look a bit
suspicious, dear boy; I don’t know what it was that struck
me as kind of odd about you . . . Well,” he decided,
“Dreamboat can take you to your cell. It isn’t six o’clock
yet, so they can count today as part of your sentence. If it
wasn’t Sunday, I’d take you there myself, just so you’d know
that — hm, that there’s no hard feelings. It was just that
strangeness of yours that did it, Rosner; but now
everything’s fine. Lock him up, Dreamboat!”
“You know, Dreamboat,” Sergeant Kolda said that evening,
“I don’t mind telling you, I liked that Rosner a lot. A really
decent man, isn’t he? I doubt if they’ll give him more than a
year.”
“I put in a good word for him,” said Officer
Dreamboat, blushing, “so they’d give him two blankets. He
isn’t used to sleeping on a bunk . . . ”
“That’s right,” observed Sergeant Kolda. “And I’ll tell
the guard to have a few words with him now and then. Just
so this Rosner will know he’s back among people again.”
85
The Poet
It was a routine police matter: at four o’clock in the morning,
an automobile knocked down an old, drunken woman
on Zitna Street and drove off at high speed. And now Dr.
Mejzlik had to determine which automobile it was. Such
responsibilities weigh heavily on a young police captain.
“Hm,” Dr. Mejzlik said to Officer 141, “from a distance
of thirty paces, then, you saw a fast-moving car and a
body lying in the street. What did you do first?”
“First, I ran over to the victim,” the policeman reported,
“to apply first aid.”
“First, you should have identified the car,” Dr. Mejzlik
grumbled, “and then worried about the old lady. But perhaps,”
he added, scratching his head with a pencil, “I would
have done the same thing. At any rate, you didn’t see the
number on the license plate; was there anything else about
the car — ?”
“I think,” Officer 141 said slowly, “that it was a dark
color of some kind. Possibly dark blue or dark red. It wasn’t
easy to see because of the exhaust fumes.”
“Oh, Christ,” Dr. Mejzlik despaired, “then how am I
going to find that car? Am I supposed to chase after all the
drivers in the city and ask them ever so kindly to tell me
whether or not they ran over an old lady? What do you
expect me to do?”
The policeman shrugged his shoulders with the helplessness
of a subordinate. “Sir,” he said, “one witness has
reported in to me, but he doesn’t know anything, either. He’s
waiting outside, sir.”
“Well, bring him in,” Dr. Mejzlik said with disgust, and
86
he searched in vain for some clue to spring forth from the
meager accident report. “Name and address, please,” he said
mechanically, without so much as looking at the witness.
“Kralik, Jan, engineering student,” the witness said
stolidly.
“And you were were present, sir, when at four o’clock
this morning an unknown automobile knocked down Bozena
Machackova?”
“Yes, and I’d have to say it was the driver’s fault. You
see, Captain, the street was completely empty; if the driver
had slowed down at the intersection — ”
“How far away were you standing?” Dr. Mejzlik
interrupted him.
“Ten paces. I was seeing a friend home from a — a
coffee house, and while we were walking along Zitna Street
— ”
“Who is your friend?” Dr. Mejzlik interrupted again. “I
don’t see his name here.”
“Jaroslav Nerad, the poet,” the witness said with a
certain amount of pride. “But I doubt if he could tell you
anything — ”
“Why not?” Dr. Mejzlik grumbled again, clutching at
any straw.
“Because he . . . he’s the sort of poet that, if something
unpleasant happens, he bursts into tears like a little child
and runs home to hide. Anyway, while we were on Zitna
Street, suddenly there came rushing up from behind us, at an
insane speed, this car — ”
“License number what?”
“I don’t know, sir, I didn’t notice it. I was watching that
insane driving, and I immediately said to myself that — ”
“And what kind of car was it?” Dr. Mejzlik interrupted.
“Four-cylinder internal combustion engine,” the expert
witness answered. “Of course, I’m no good at makes of cars
— ”
“And what color was it? Who was in it? Was it a
87
convertible or a sedan?”
“I don’t know,” the witness said in confusion. “I think
it was a sort of black car, but I can’t come any closer than
that, because when the accident happened I said to Nerad:
Look, those bastards knocked somebody down and didn’t
even stop!”
“Hm,” Dr. Mejzlik commented with dissatisfaction.
“That is, admittedly, a fitting and no doubt correct moral
reaction, but I would rather you’d gotten the license number.
I am amazed, sir, how incapable people are of simple observation.
You’re absolutely convinced that the driver is at
fault, you’re absolutely convinced that people like that are
bastards, but as for systematic, practical observation —
Thank you, Mr. Kralik; I won’t delay you any longer.”
Within the hour, Officer 141 had rung the bell at the
lodgings of the poet Jaroslav Nerad. Yes, the poet Nerad
was at home, but he was sleeping. Moments later, the poet
himself was at the doorway, rolling small, astonished eyes at
the policeman; he couldn’t remember, exactly, just what
wrongdoing he had committed.
At length he was able to grasp why they wanted him at
the police station. “Must I go?” he asked suspiciously. “The
fact is, I don’t remember anything at all; that night I was a
bit — ”
“Smashed,” the policeman said understandingly. “I’ve
known many poets, sir. So get dressed, sir; I’ll wait for you.”
Whereupon the poet and the policeman began to chat
about neighborhood bars, life in general, various celestial
phenomena, and many other matters; only politics was alien
to both. Thus, in friendly and instructive conversation, the
poet arrived at the station house.
“You are Mr. Jaroslav Nerad, poet,” Dr. Mejzlik said to
him, “and witness. You were present when an unidentified
automobile knocked down Bozena Machackova.”
“Yes,” the poet sighed.
“Can you tell me what kind of car it was? Whether it
88
was a sedan or a convertible, what color, who was in it,
what the license number was?”
The poet struggled with his thoughts. “I don’t know,”
he said. “I didn’t notice.”
“You don’t recall any details?” Dr. Mejzlik pressed.
“Not a one,” the poet said candidly. “I never pay
attention to details, you see.”
“Thank you,” Dr. Mejzlik fired off with considerable
irony. “Just what, if may I ask, were you paying attention
to?”
“The total mood,” the poet replied vaguely. “You know,
the long, deserted street . . . at dawn . . . and how that
woman lay there on the ground — ” Suddenly he leaped to
his feet. “But I wrote something about it after I got home!”
He fumbled in his pockets and began to pull out an increasing
number of wrappers, bills, and other scraps of paper.
“No, that’s not it,” he kept muttering, “that’s not it, either
— Wait, maybe this is it,” he said, absorbed in studying the
back of an envelope.
“Show it to me,” Dr. Mejzlik said indulgently.
“It’s nothing,” the poet objected. “But if you like, I’ll
read it to you.” Whereupon, rolling his eyes rapturously and
melodiously elongating the syllables, he recited:
march of dark houses once twice to stop to stand
aurora plays upon a mandolin
why girl why do you blush
with oncoming car 120 HP to the end of the earth
or to Singapore
stop stop the car flies o0
nour great love sprawls in dust
a girl a broken blossom
swan’s neck bosom drum and cymbal
why do I weep so much
“And that’s all of it,” Jaroslav Nerad declared.
“Excuse me,” said Dr. Mejzlik, “but what does it
mean?”
89
“Well, it’s the automobile accident, of course,” the poet
said in astonishment. “You mean you don’t understand it?”
“I don’t think so,” Dr. Mejzlik said with a frown.
“Somehow it doesn’t convey to me that on July 15, at four
o’clock in the morning, on Zitna Street, an automobile with
license number such-and-such knocked down a sixty-year-old
drunken beggarwoman, Bozena Machackova; and that she
was injured and taken to the General Hospital, and that she
nearly died. Your poem, sir, insofar as I can tell, did not
mention those particular facts. No.”
“Sir,” the poet said, rubbing his nose, “that is only raw,
surface reality. A poem is inner reality. Poems are unfettered,
surreal images which reality evokes in the subconscious of
the poet, you see? Visual and aural associations, you might
say. And the reader must yield himself to them,” Jaroslav
Nerad proclaimed reprovingly. “Then he will understand.”
“I beg your pardon,” Dr. Mejzlik erupted. “No, wait a
minute, loan me your opus. Thank you. All right then, here
we have, hm: ‘March of dark houses once twice to stop to
stand.’ Please explain to me, if you will — ”
“But that’s Zitna Street,” the poet said serenely. “Those
two rows of buildings, you see.”
“And why isn’t it, say, Narodni Avenue?” Dr. Mejzlik
asked skeptically.
“Because it isn’t as straight,” came the answer with conviction.
“All right. ‘Aurora plays upon a mandolin’ — Well,
we’ll grant that one. ‘Why girl why do you blush’ — Please,
where does this girl come into it?”
“The red sunrise,” the poet said laconically.
“Aha. Excuse me. ‘With oncoming car 120 HP to the
end of the earth’ — Well?”
“Maybe that was when the car arrived,” the poet
explained.
“It was 120 horsepower?”
“I don’t know about that; it means that it was coming
90
fast. As if it wanted to soar to the end of the earth.”
“I see. ‘Or to Singapore’ — Why exactly Singapore, for
heaven’s sake?”
The poet shrugged his shoulders. “I don’t know. I
suppose it’s because the Malays are there.”
“And what is the relationship between the car and the
Malays? Hm?”
The poet fidgeted uneasily. “Maybe the car was brown,
could that be it?” he pondered. “Certainly something there
was brown. Why else would it have been Singapore?”
“Look,” said Dr. Mejzlik, “that car has already been
red, blue, and black. What am I supposed to choose from all
that?”
“Choose brown,” the poet advised. “It’s a nice color.”
“‘Our great love sprawls in dust / a girl a broken
blossom,’” Dr. Mejzlik read on. “This broken blossom, is
that the drunken beggarwoman?”
“I wouldn’t write about a drunken beggarwoman,” the
poet said, offended. “She was simply a woman, do you see?”
“Aha. And what is this: ‘swan’s neck bosom drum and
cymbal’ — is that free association?”
“Show it to me,” the poet said in confusion, and he
bent over the piece of paper. “‘Swan’s neck bosom drum and
cymbal’ — What can that be?”
“I just asked that,” Dr. Mejzlik grumbled somewhat
touchily.
“Wait,” the poet reflected, “there must have been
something that reminded me — Listen, doesn’t it strike you
that sometimes the numeral two looks like a swan’s neck?
Look at this,” and with Mejzlik’s pencil he wrote a 2.
“Aha,” Dr. Mejzlik said attentively. “And what of the
bosom?”
“Surely that’s a three, two curves, right?” the poet
marveled.
“You still have the drum and cymbal,” the police
captain burst out, his voice taut with suspense.
91
“Drum and cymbal,” the poet Nerad said thoughtfully,
“drum and cymbal . . . that might just possibly be a five,
mightn’t it? Watch,” he said, and he drew the numeral 5.
“That little belly is like a drum, and the cymbal above it —
”
“Wait,” Dr. Mejzlik said, and he wrote down 235 on
the piece of paper. “Are you certain that the car had the
license number 235?”
“I paid no attention whatsoever to any numbers,”
Jaroslav Nerad proclaimed resolutely. “But something like
that must have been there — Or why else would it be
here?” he marveled, inspecting his little composition. “And,
you know, this is the best part of the entire poem.”
* * *
Two days later, Dr. Mejzlik called on the poet. This time the
poet was not asleep, for he had a girlfriend of some sort
there, and he began a futile search for a vacant chair to
offer the police captain.
“I can’t stay,” said Dr. Mejzlik. “I only came to tell you
that it really was a car with license number 235.”
“What car?” the poet wondered.
“Swan’s neck bosom drum and cymbal,” Dr. Mejzlik
poured out in a single breath. “And Singapore, too.”
“Oh, of course; now I know,” the poet remarked. “So
you see, here you have inner reality. Would you like me to
read you a couple of other poems? You’ll understand them
now.”
“Some other time,” the police captain answered without
hesitation. “When I have another case.”
92
Mr. Janik’s Cases
This Mr. Janik is neither the Dr. Janik from the government
ministry, nor the Janik who shot the estate-owner Jirsa, nor
the stockbroker Janik who is said to have made a run of
three hundred and twenty-six at billiards, but Mr. Janik the
head of the firm of Janik and Holecek, wholesale dealers in
pulp and paper goods; he is a respectable and rather short
gentleman who once courted a Miss Severova but, in his
despair at her refusal, never married; in brief, the Janik in
question, to avoid all possibility of error, is known as Janik
the pulp-and- paper man.
Now, Mr. Janik the pulp-and-paper man got involved in
this following matter by sheer luck, somewhere along the
Sazava River, where he was spending his summer vacation,
when they were searching for the body of Ruzena
Regnerova, who had been murdered by her fiancé, Jindrich
Basta, who had soaked the poor woman’s body in kerosene,
burnt it, and buried it in the woods. Although Basta had
been proven guilty of murdering Ruzena, no trace of her
body or bones could be found. For nine days the police had
been tramping through the forest guided by Basta, who kept
pointing out to them that this is where it was or that is
where it was; they kept digging and shoveling, but to no
avail. It was clear that the exhausted Basta was either
leading them on a wild goose chase or playing for time. He
was a young man from a respectable and well-to-do family,
this Jindrich Basta, but probably the doctor had squeezed his
head too hard with the forceps when he came into the
world; in brief, there was something wrong with him, he
was a peculiar and perverted human being. For nine days
93
now he had led the police all over the forest, pale as a
ghost, his eyes twitching with a nystagmus of horror; it was
painful and awkward to look at him. The police floundered
about with him through bilberries and marshes; by now they
were so furious that it’s a wonder they didn’t snap and bite,
and they were thinking to themselves, you animal, we’ll haul
you around till you steer us to the right spot in spite of
yourself! Basta, so spent that he could hardly drag himself
along, sank to the ground yet again and rasped: “Here,
here’s where I buried her!”
“On your feet, Basta,” a policeman bawled at him.
“This isn’t the place! Get moving!”
Basta stood up, tottering, and staggered on a little
farther until he once again collapsed with exhaustion. The
order of the procession was something like this: four uniformed
officers, two plainclothesmen, a pair of gamekeepers,
and some old codgers with shovels; and, convulsively shuffling
along behind, a livid wreck of a human being, Jindrich
Basta.
Mr. Janik knew the policemen from the local inn;
consequently, he was allowed to join this tragic procession
through the woods without being yanked aside and told to
mind his own business. Besides, he was carrying a parcel
containing canned sardines, salami, cognac, and similar
commodities, which came in very handy. On the ninth day
things were bad, so bad that Mr. Janik resolved: I won’t tag
along with them again. The policemen were very nearly
barking with rage and exasperation, the gamekeepers were
protesting that they’d had enough of this and had plenty of
other work to do, the old codgers with the shovels were
grumbling that twenty per day was damn little for a tough
job like this and, crumpled on the ground, Jindrich Basta
was shaking in convulsions, no longer responding to the
shouts and demands of the police. At this bleak and bewildering
moment Mr. Janik did something which was not, so
to speak, on the agenda: he knelt down beside Basta, thrust
94
a ham roll in his hand, and said compassionately: “Here,
Mr. Basta — come now, Mr. Basta, can you hear me?” Basta
uttered a howl and burst into tears. “I’ll find it . . . I’ll find
it, sir,” he sobbed, and he tried to stand up; at that moment
one of the plainclothesmen came over and lifted him to his
feet almost tenderly. “You can lean on me, Mr. Basta,” he
encouraged him. “Mr. Janik’ll take hold of you from the
other side; that’s it. Now then, Mr. Basta, you’ll show Mr.
Janik where it was, won’t you?”
An hour later, Jindrich Basta, smoking a cigarette, stood
over a shallow pit from which a thigh bone protruded.
“Is that the body of Ruzena Regnerova?” Sergeant
Trunka asked grimly.
“Yes,” Jindrich Basta said calmly, and he flicked the ash
from his cigarette into the open pit. “Is there anything else
you want, gentlemen?” —
“You know, sir,” Sergeant Trunka declared to Mr. Janik
that evening at the inn, “you’re a regular psychologist, that’s
all there is to it. To your health, sir! He softened up the
minute you called him ‘Mr. Basta’! He was trying to cling to
his self-respect, the miserable wretch, and here we were
shoving him around — But tell me, please, how did you
know that being polite to him would work?”
“Oh,” said the hero of the day, blushing modestly,
“that’s just the way I am, you know. I say ‘Mr.’ to everyone,
you know. And then I felt sorry for him, so I thought I’d
offer him a ham roll — ”
“Instinct,” announced Sergeant Trunka. “That’s what I
call a nose for it, and psychology, too. To your health, Mr.
Janik! It’s a waste of talent, though, you really ought to join
the force — ”
Some time after that, Mr. Janik took the night train to
Bratislava. A Slovak paper mill was holding its annual
stockholders meeting there, and since Mr. Janik was very
95
much involved with the mill, he wanted to attend. “Wake
me up before we get to Bratislava,” he said to the conductor,
“or else I’ll sleep right on through to the Austrian border.”
Whereupon he crawled into his berth, pleased at having the
compartment to himself, settled down comfortably as a dead
man, reflected for a few minutes on various business matters,
and fell fast asleep. He had no idea what time it might
have been when the conductor opened the door of the
compartment for some passenger, who then undressed and
climbed into the upper berth. Only in a half-dream did Mr.
Janik see a pair of socks and two extraordinarily hairy legs
dangling down, and hear the grunts of someone burying
himself in the bedcovers, followed by the click of the light
switch and then clattering darkness again. Mr. Janik
dreamed about a number of things, mostly that he was being
pursued by hairy legs, and then he was awakened by a
prolonged silence and the sound of somebody outside calling:
“Until we meet again at Zilina!” At that he leaped up
from his berth and looked out the window; he saw that day
was breaking, that the train had come to a stop in the
Bratislava station, and that the conductor had forgotten to
wake him. In his panic he didn’t even stop to swear, but
with feverish speed tugged his trousers and the rest of his
clothes over his pyjamas, shoved all his odds and ends into
his pockets, and jumped onto the platform just as the signal
was being given for the train to leave.
Oof,” Mr. Janik spluttered, and he shook his fist at the
departing train and went into the men’s room to finish
dressing. When finally he got around to organizing the
contents of his pockets, he was horror-struck: in his breast
pocket, instead of one billfold he had two. The fatter of the
two, which wasn’t his, contained sixty new Czechoslovak
five-hundred-crown notes. Obviously it belonged to his
traveling companion of the previous night, but how it had
got into his pocket Mr. Janik, still half asleep, couldn’t for
the life of him imagine. Very well then, the first thing to do,
96
of course, was to get hold of somebody from the police to
whom he could hand over the stranger’s billfold. The police
left Mr. Janik sitting on the brink of starvation while they
telephoned to Galenta, so that the people there could notify
the passenger in berth number 14 that his billfold, with the
money, was at the police station in Bratislava. Then Mr.
Janik had to give them information about himself, and then
he went off to have breakfast. Then someone from the police
tracked him down and asked him if there hadn’t been some
kind of mix-up; the fact was, the gentleman in berth number
14 claimed that he hadn’t lost a billfold. Mr. Janik had to go
back to the police station and explain for the second time
how the billfold had come into his possession. Meanwhile,
two plainclothesmen had taken the sixty bills away somewhere,
and only after Mr. Janik had waited for half an hour,
seated between two detectives, did they deliver him to some
exalted, high-level police official.
“Mr. Janik,” said the exalted, high-level police official,
“we’re sending a telegram at this very moment to Parkan-
Nana to have the passenger in berth number 14 detained.
Can you give us an exact description of him?”
About all that Mr. Janik could say was that the passenger
had remarkably hairy legs. The exalted, high-level police
official was not overly satisfied with this. “You see, those
notes are forgeries,” he said suddenly. “You’ll have to
remain here until we can confront you with your fellow
passenger.”
Inwardly Mr. Janik cursed the conductor, who had not
wakened him in time and thus was to blame for Mr. Janik,
in his haste, winding up with that confounded billfold in his
pocket. After perhaps an hour, a message arrived from
Parkan-Nana to the effect that the passenger in berth number
14 had gotten off the train at Nove Zamky; where he
had gone after that, by foot or by other means, was, for the
time being, unknown.
“Mr. Janik,” the exalted, high-level police official said
97
at last, “we won’t keep you here any longer; we’re turning
this matter over to Inspector Hrusek in Prague, who’s firstrate
on these counterfeits. But I want to assure you that this
is very serious business. You go on back to Prague as fast as
you can, and they’ll call you there. In the meantime, thanks
for coming across those forgeries in such a lucky way. That
was no mere accident, sir.”
Scarcely had Mr. Janik returned to Prague than police
headquarters called; he was met by a huge, heavy-set gentleman
whom everyone there addressed as President, and the
sallow and scrawny individual named Inspector Hruska. “Sit
down, Mr. Janik,” said the heavy-set gentleman as he broke
the seal on a small package. “Is this the billfold that you . .
. um, that you found in your pocket at the Bratislava train
station?”
“Yes,” sighed Mr. Janik.
The heavy-set gentleman counted the new notes inside
the billfold. “Sixty,” he said. “All with the serial number
27451. That’s the number they telegraphed us from the
frontier at Cheb.”
The scrawny man picked up one of the notes, closed his
eyes and rubbed it between his fingers, and then sniffed at it.
“These here are from Graz,” he said. “The ones from
Geneva aren’t so sticky.”
“Graz,” the heavy-set gentleman repeated, deep in
thought. “That’s where they make these things for Budapest,
isn’t it?”
The scrawny man merely blinked. “I guess I could go to
Vienna,” he offered. “But the Vienna police still won’t hand
him over to us.”
“Hm,” muttered the heavy-set gentleman. “Then figure
out some other way for us to get hold of him. If nothing
else works, tell them we’ll exchange him for Leberhardt.
Well, a pleasant journey, Hruska. And as for you, sir,” he
said, turning to Mr. Janik, “I really don’t know how to
thank you. You’re the one who found Jindrich Basta’s girl,
98
aren’t you?”
Mr. Janik turned red. “That was only a fluke,” he said
quickly. “I really . . . I had no idea that . . . ”
“You’ve got a real knack for this, Mr. Janik,” the
heavy-set gentleman said approvingly. “It’s a God-given
talent. Most people couldn’t track down a clue to save their
souls, while others stumble right on top of them. You ought
to join us, Mr. Janik.”
“I really couldn’t,” Mr. Janik protested. “I . . . what I
mean is, I’ve got my own business . . . doing very well
actually . . . an old established firm I inherited from my
grandfather . . . ”
“Suit yourself,” the huge man sighed, “but it’s a pity all
the same. It isn’t everyone who has your kind of luck. We’ll
meet again, Mr. Janik.”
About a month later, Mr. Janik was having dinner with a
business friend from Leipzig. Needless to say, at a dinner of
that kind, between businessmen, cost was not a consideration
— the brandy in particular was exceptionally good —
and by the end of the evening Mr. Janik had absolutely no
intention of walking home, so he beckoned to the waiter and
said: “I’ll need a car and driver!” On leaving the hotel, he
saw that a car was already waiting in front of the entrance.
So he got inside, slammed the door, and in his cheerful
mood clean forgot that he hadn’t told the driver where he
lived. The car started up nonetheless, and Mr. Janik, comfortably
installed in a corner, fell asleep.
How long the ride lasted, he had no idea; but he was
awakened by the car stopping and the driver opening the
door: “Here we are, sir. You’re to go upstairs, sir.” Mr.
Janik glanced around to see where on earth he could possibly
be, but since it didn’t really make that much difference
to him, thanks to the brandy, he went on up the stairs and
opened a door, behind which he could hear a noisy conver99
sation. There were perhaps twenty men in the room, all of
whom turned to stare anxiously at the door as he entered.
Suddenly there was an odd silence. One of the men stood up
and came toward Mr. Janik: “What do you want? Who are
you?”
Mr. Janik looked around in astonishment. He recognized
five or six of those present — they were wealthy
people who, it was rumored, shared certain political interests,
but Mr. Janik never meddled in politics. “Well, look
who’s here,” he said cheerfully, “if it isn’t Mr. Koubek and
Mr. Heller. And you too, Ferry! Boys, I could do with a
drink.”
“What’s he doing here?” raged one of the group. “Is he
one of us?”
Two others from the group pushed Mr. Janik back into
the hallway. “How’d you get here?” one of them demanded
savagely. “Who told you to come here?”
Mr. Janik was sobered by this lack of friendliness.
“Where am I?” he asked indignantly. “Why the devil did
you bring me here?”
One of the two men raced downstairs and pounced on
the driver. “You damn fool,” he shouted, “where did you
pick him up?”
“In front of the hotel, where else?” the driver shot back
defensively. “They told me this afternoon, wait for some
man in front of the hotel at ten tonight and bring him here.
This man got in my car at ten on the dot and never said a
word, so I drove him straight here — ”
“Good God,” yelled the other, “it’s the wrong man!
You’ve really blown it for us now!”
Resigned, Mr. Janik sat down on the stairs. “I get it,”
he said complacently, “it’s some kind of secret meeting, isn’t
it? Now you’ll have to strangle me and bury the corpse.
Glass of water!”
“Look,” said one of the two men, “you’re just confused.
That wasn’t Mr. Koubek or Mr. Heller up there,
100
understand? It’s a mistake, that’s all. We’ll get you back to
Prague. Sorry for the misunderstanding.”
“Don’t mention it,” Mr. Janik said magnanimously. “I
know the driver’s going to shoot me on the way back and
bury me in the woods. It doesn’t matter. Idiot that I was, I
forgot to give him my address. This is what I get for it.”
“You’re drunk, aren’t you?” the man asked with unmistakable
relief.
“More or less,” Mr. Janik agreed. “I had dinner with
Meyer, and he’s from Dresden, see. I’m Janik, wholesale
paper and pulp,” he introduced himself from his seat on the
steps. “A fine old firm founded by my grandfather.”
“Go sleep it off,” the man advised him. “And once
you’ve slept it off, you won’t even remember that we — hm,
that we inconvenienced you like this.”
“That’s right,” Mr. Janik said with considerable dignity.
“You go sleep it off, too. Where’s my bed?”
“It’s back at your house,” said the man. “The driver’s
going to take you home. Here, I’ll help you stand up.”
“No need for that,” Mr. Janik demurred. “I’m not as
drunk as you are. You go sleep it off. Driver, take me to
Bubenec.”
The car headed back towards Bubenec, and Mr. Janik,
with a foxy glint in his eye, paid close attention to where
they were starting from and which way they were going.
The next morning he telephoned police headquarters and
related his adventures of the previous night. “Mr. Janik,”
replied the voice from headquarters after a moment’s silence,
“this is of extreme interest to us. I beg you to come down to
headquarters at once.”
When Mr. Janik arrived, four people were waiting for
him, with the huge, heavy-set gentleman at their head. Mr.
Janik had to tell once more what had happened and whom
he had seen. “The license number of the car was NXX
101
705,” added the heavy-set gentleman. “A private car. Of the
six persons Mr. Janik recognized, three are new to me.
Gentlemen, I’ll leave you now. Mr. Janik, come with me.”
Mr. Janik sat like a small, shy schoolboy in the large
office of the heavy-set gentleman, who was now pacing to
and fro, deep in thought. “Mr. Janik,” he said at last, “the
first thing I must ask you is: not a word to anyone about
this. Reasons of state, do you understand?”
Mr. Janik nodded silently. Dear God, he thought to
himself, I’ve let myself in for it again!
“Mr. Janik,” the heavy-set gentleman said suddenly,
“I’m not trying to flatter you, but we need your services.
You’re lucky, that’s all there is to it — People can talk all
they like about method, but a detective who doesn’t have
plain dumb luck is worthless. We need people who are lucky.
We’ve got more than enough brains; what we need are a few
lucky breaks. What you really ought to do, you know, is
join us.”
“But what about my business?” Mr. Janik whispered,
thoroughly miserable.
“Your partner can look after that; it would be a shame
to waste a gift like yours. Well, what do you say?”
“I’ll . . . I’ll have to think it over,” stammered the
unhappy Mr. Janik. “I’ll come and see you in a week; but if
I really have the knack . . . and if that’s what I should do . .
. I just don’t know; but I have to go now.”
“All right,” said the heavy-set gentleman, giving him a
massive handshake. “But don’t doubt for one minute that
you have the knack. See you next week.”
Less than a week had gone by when Mr. Janik turned up
again. “Well, here I am,” he declared, his face beaming.
“Made up your mind?” asked the heavy-set gentleman.
“Yes, thank God,” Mr. Janik sighed happily. “What I
mean is, I’ve come to tell you that it won’t work, that I’m
102
just not cut out for it.”
“No? But why not?”
“Picture this,” announced the jubilant Mr. Janik, “my
partner’s been stealing from me these past five years, and I,
idiot that I am, never had the faintest idea what he was up
to! Well, just ask yourself, what kind of detective would I
make? For five years I worked side by side with that rascal,
and I never once caught on! So you can see I’d be worthless,
God be praised! And I was already starting to get so nervous!
My goodness, I’m glad that nothing’s going to come of
it! I’m safely out of it now, aren’t I? Thank you, sir, many,
many thanks!”
103
The Fall of the House of Voticky
One day there arrived at the office of Detective Captain Dr.
Mejzlik a smallish man with gold-rimmed glasses and a
worried expression. “Archivist Divisek,” he murmured.
“Captain, I’ve come to consult you . . . as a prominent
criminologist; that is, I’ve been told that you happen to be .
. . that is to say . . . most particularly in regard to the more
complex cases — That is to say, this is an unusually puzzling
case,” he declared emphatically.
“Just tell me what it’s all about,” said Dr. Mejzlik,
reaching for a notepad and pencil.
“There ought to be an investigation,” archivist Divisek
blurted out, “as to who murdered Sir Petr Berkovec, how his
brother Henricus died, and what happened to Sir Petr’s wife,
Katerina.”
“Berkovec, Petr,” Dr. Mejzlik reflected. “To my knowledge
we’ve received no report of his death. You’d like to
make a statement, is that it?”
“Oh, no,” the archivist said. “That is to say, I’ve only
come to you for advice, you see. Something terrible must
have happened.”
“When was it?” Dr. Mejzlik prompted. “First of all the
date, please.”
“In the year fourteen hundred and sixty-five, of course,”
said Mr. Divisek, looking reproachfully at the captain
through his glasses. “You ought to know that, sir: during the
blessed reign of King Jiri of Podebrady.”
“I see,” said Dr. Mejzlik, and he tossed the notepad and
pencil aside. “In that case, my dear sir,” he stated with
conspicuous cordiality, “it would be better to talk with Dr.
104
Knobloch,” by which he meant the police physician. “Why
don’t I call him?”
The archivist frowned. “What a shame,” he said, “since
you were so highly recommended to me. You see, I am in
the midst of preparing a historical work on the reign of Jiri
of Podebrady, and when I stumbled, yes, stumbled across
this matter, I didn’t know where to turn for advice.”
Harmless, Dr. Mejzlik decided. “My dear sir,” he said
quickly, “I’m afraid I can’t be of much use to you. I must
confess that I’m far too weak in history.”
“That’s a mistake,” Mr. Divisek noted sternly. “You
ought to know history. But since the relevant historical
material is not known to you at first hand, sir, I will introduce
you to all the known facts; unfortunately, there are
very few of them. First and foremost, there is the letter from
Sir Ladislav Pchac of Olesna to Sir Jan Borsovsky of
Cercany. You are, of course, aware of this letter.”
“I’m sorry to say that I’m not,” Dr. Mejzlik confessed
with the contrition of an ill-prepared schoolboy.
“But, my good man,” Mr. Divisek burst out in astonishment,
“the historian Sebek published this letter seventeen
years ago in his Regesta! At the very least you ought to
know that! However,” he added, adjusting his glasses,
“neither Sebek nor Pekar nor Novotny nor anyone else
devoted proper attention to this letter. And this very letter,
which of course you ought to have known about, led me to
the clues in this case.”
“Aha,” Dr. Mejzlik said. “Go on.”
“First of all, the letter,” said the archivist. “Unfortunately,
I don’t have the text with me, but only one of its
references pertains to our case. He — that is, Sir Ladislav
Pchac — writes to Sir Jan Borsovsky that his uncle — that is
to say, Sir Jan’s uncle, Sir Jesek Skalicky of Skalice, in this
Year of Our Lord 1465, is no longer in attendance at the
court in Prague, in view of the fact that His Royal Highness
commanded Sir Jesek, ‘due to the woeful deeds at Votice
105
Velenova,’ as the writer puts it, henceforth to come no more
to the royal court, to repent of the Lord God his choleric
temper, and to await divine justice. You understand by this,”
the archivist explained, “that we would say that His Royal
Highness confined Sir Jesek to his own estates and holdings.
Doesn’t something about that strike you as odd, sir?”
“Not at the moment, no,” Dr. Mejzlik said, drawing a
remarkable spiral on his notepad.
“You see!” Mr. Divisek exclaimed triumphantly. “Sebek
didn’t notice it, either. It is a very striking circumstance, sir,
that His Royal Highness did not summon Sir Jesek —
whatever those woeful deeds might have been — to proper
secular judgment, but committed him to divine justice
instead. His Highness makes it unmistakably clear,” the
archivist continued, with obvious deference, “that these
woeful deeds are of such a nature that the sovereign himself
exempts them from worldly justice. If you knew His Highness,
sir, you would realize that this is an extra-ordinarily
unusual occurrence. King Jiri of blessed memory was most
firm in his regard for the strict and proper discharge of
justice.”
“Perhaps the king was afraid of Sir Jesek,” Dr. Mejzlik
offered. “After all, in those days — ”
The archivist sprang from his chair in indignation.
“Sir,” he stammered, “what are you saying? That King Jiri
might have been afraid of someone? And of a mere knight at
that?”
“Then there was some sort of favoritism involved,” Dr.
Mejzlik said. “You know, the way we — ”
“No favoritism!” Mr. Divisek cried out, quite red in the
face. “Perhaps one could speak of favoritism during the
reign of King Vladislav, but during the reign of King Jiri —
no indeed, sir, how could you even think of such a thing! He
would have banished you for even suggesting it!” The
archivist calmed himself somewhat. “No favoritism. Sir, it’s
obvious that there must have been something singular about
106
those woeful deeds for His Royal Highness to have abandoned
Sir Jesek to divine justice.”
“And what were those deeds?” Dr. Mejzlik sighed.
Archivist Divisek looked surprised. “But that is what
you have to find out for me,” he said in amazement. “What
is a criminologist for? That’s the reason I’ve come to you!”
“Oh, for heaven’s sake,” Dr. Mejzlik began defensively,
but the archivist would not allow him to finish. “First you
must know the facts,” he instructed. “When I noticed those
obscure references in the letter, I began to investigate those
woeful deeds at Votice Velenova. Unfortunately, no records
have survived; however, in the church at Votice Velenova I
found the tombstone of Sir Petr Berkovec, and that stone,
sir, is dated 1465! As you know, Sir Petr was the son-in-law
of Sir Jesek; that is, Sir Petr married Sir Jesek’s daughter,
Katerina. Here is a photograph of the tombstone — now,
don’t you notice something peculiar about it?”
“No,” Dr. Mejzlik said, examining both front and back
of the photograph of the tombstone, on which was carved a
knight with his hands crossed on his breast, surrounded by
an inscription in gothic letters. “Wait, there’s a fingerprint
here in the corner.”
“It’s probably from my finger,” the archivist said, “but
notice the inscription!”
“Anno Domini MCCCCLXV,” Dr. Mejzlik read with
some effort. “The Year of Our Lord 1465. That’s the year of
this man’s death, right?”
“Of course it is; don’t you know anything? But take a
look: some of the letters are noticeably larger than the
others!” And the archivist quickly wrote with the pencil:
ANNO DOMINI MCCCCLXV. “The sculptor deliberately
made the letters O, C, and C larger; it’s a cryptogram, do
you see? Write down the letters O, C, C — doesn’t anything
strike you about them?”
“OCC, OCC,” Dr. Mejzlik muttered, “that could be —
aha, it’s short for OCCISUS, right? That means ‘murdered’!”
107
“Yes,” the archivist proclaimed solemnly. “That is the
manner in which the sculptor indicated to posterity that the
nobly-born Sir Petr Berkovec de Wotice Welenova had been
murdered. There we have it!”
“And his father-in-law, this Jesek Skalicky, murdered
him,” Dr. Mejzlik declared in an unexpected burst of historical
enlightenment.
“Nonsense,” Mr. Divisek said scornfully. “If Sir Jesek
had murdered Sir Petr, His Royal Highness would have
summoned him before the king’s bench. But that’s not all,
sir: directly beside this tombstone is another, under which
lies Henricus Berkovec de Wotice Welenova, the brother of
Sir Petr; and on that stone is the very same date, 1465, only
without a cryptogram! And on that same stone, Sir Henricus
is shown with a sword in his hand; the sculptor obviously
wanted to indicate that Sir Henricus had died in honorable
battle. And now tell me, for heaven’s sake, how these two
deaths are connected!”
“Perhaps it’s only a coincidence,” Dr. Mejzlik suggested
uncertainly, “that this Henricus lost his life that same year
— ”
“Coincidence!” the archivist shouted in exasperation.
“Sir, we historians do not acknowledge coincidence! Where
would we be if we admitted that something had happened
by coincidence? There must be some kind of causal relationship!
But I’ve not yet finished telling you everything. In the
following year, 1466, Sir Jesek Skalicky died; and, if you
please, his holdings at Skalice and Hradek fell to his cousin,
Sir Jan Borsovsky of Cercany, whom I mentioned before. Do
you realize what that means? It means, sir, that Sir Jesek’s
daughter, Katerina, who as every child knows was married
in 1464 to this same Sir Petr Berkovec, was no longer living!
And the Lady Katerina, if you please, has no tombstone
anywhere! Would you say it is also coincidence that the
Lady Katerina utterly vanishes from our sight immediately
following the death of her husband? What about that? Do
108
you call that coincidence, sir? And why is there no tombstone
for her? Coincidence? Or does it have to do with those
woeful deeds for which His Royal Highness committed Sir
Jesek to divine justice?”
“It’s altogether possible,” Dr. Mejzlik supposed, with
somewhat greater interest.
“It’s altogether certain,” Mr. Divisek proclaimed, admitting
no doubts. “And now, you understand, it is a question
of who killed whom and how everything is connected. The
death of Sir Jesek does not interest us, because he survived
those ‘woeful deeds;’ otherwise, King Jiri would not have bid
him repent of them to the Lord God. We must establish who
killed Sir Petr, how Sir Henricus died, how to account for
the Lady Katerina, and what Sir Jesek Skalicky had to do
with all this!”
“Wait,” Dr. Mejzlik said, “let’s draw up a list of the
parties involved:
1. Petr Berkovec — murdered;
2. Henricus Berkovec — killed in battle, right?
3. Kate — vanished without a clue;
4. Jesek Skalicky — abandoned to divine justice. Is that
it?”
“It is,” said the archivist, blinking cautiously. “You
might have said Sir Petr, Sir Jesek, and so forth. But go on.”
“At the same time,” Dr. Mejzlik reflected, “you eliminate
the possibility that this Jesek could have murdered his
son-in-law Petr Berkovec, because in that case he would
have been brought before a jury.”
“Summoned before the king’s bench,” the archivist
amended. “Otherwise, that is correct.”
“Then that leaves only Henricus, Petr’s brother. Most
likely Henricus murdered his brother — ”
“That’s not possible,” grumbled the archivist. “If he
had, they wouldn’t have buried him in the church — at least
not next to his brother.”
“Aha. Then Henricus merely arranged for the murder of
109
his brother and later himself was killed in some battle,
right?”
“Why then would Sir Jesek have received a reprimand
from the king for his violent temper?” retorted the archivist,
fidgeting in dissatisfaction. “And where would Katerina have
disappeared to?”
“That’s true,” Dr. Mejzlik muttered. “Listen, this is a
complicated case. Let’s suppose that Petr caught his wife
Katerina in flagrante with Henricus and killed her. Her
father, Jesek, found out about it and murdered his son-in-law
in anger.”
“That wouldn’t work, either,” objected Mr. Divisek. “If
Sir Petr had killed Katerina for adultery, her father would
have agreed with what he’d done. Believe me, in those days
they were quite strict about that sort of thing.”
“Wait a minute,” said Dr. Mejzlik, deep in thought.
“Let’s say that Petr simply killed her; maybe he got into an
argument with her — ”
“But then they’d have erected a tombstone for her,”
claimed the archivist, shaking his head. “That won’t do. Sir,
I have racked my brain over this for a year now, and nothing
fits together.”
“Hm,” said Dr. Mejzlik, contemplating the rather short
roster. “Confounded business. Maybe we’re missing some
fifth person.”
“What would you do with a fifth?” asked Mr. Divisek
reproachfully. “You don’t even know what to do with the
four we have!”
“Then it must have been one of those two who killed
Petr Berkovec: either his father-in-law or his brother — I’ll
be damned!” Mejzlik shouted abruptly. “Listen, it’s Katerina!
She’s the one who did it!”
“Oh, dear!” the archivist burst out in evident distress.
“I didn’t even want to think about that! Good Lord, could
she really have done it? And what would have happened to
her then?”
110
Dr. Mejzlik’s ears grew red with concentration. “Just a
minute,” he said, and he leaped up, pacing the room in
agitation. “Yes,” he cried, “yes, I’m beginning to see it now!
My God, this is quite a case! Yes, it’s coming together now
— and Sir Jesek has the leading role! Yes, the circle is
closing! And that’s why Jiri — Now I understand! Listen, he
was one sharp operator, King Jiri!”
“He was,” Mr. Divisek stated piously. “Let me tell you,
he was a wise monarch!”
“Look,” said Dr. Mejzlik, sitting down on his desktop
and landing on the inkstand, “this is how it could have
happened; and I’d swear on a stack of Bibles that it’s exactly
what did happen! Now first of all, any hypothesis we
advance must take into account all of the known facts;
nothing, not even the slightest circumstance, can be allowed
to contradict it. In the second place, these facts must be
arranged into a single, continuous action; the simpler, the
more contained and connected the action, the more likely
that things happened exactly that way and not otherwise.
We’re talking now about reconstruction of the events, see.
The hypothesis that places all known facts into the most
connected, most rational chain of events is without qualification
the one for us, do you understand?” said Dr. Mejzlik,
looking severely at the archivist. “This is our basic rule of
methodology.”
“Yes,” the archivist said obediently.
“Now the facts which we must bear in mind probably
occurred in the following order:
1. Petr Berkovec married Katerina;
2. Petr was murdered;
3. Katerina disappeared without a tombstone;
4. Henricus died in some conflict;
5. The king rebuked Jesek Skalicky for his violent temper.
6. But the king did not have Jesek brought to trial: so
Jesek Skalicky was somehow or other in the right.
“Are these all the known facts? They are. To continue:
111
it follows from the known facts that neither Henricus nor
Jesek murdered Petr. Who, then, could have murdered him?
Katerina, obviously. This conjecture is supported by the fact
that we have no tombstone for Katerina; probably she was
simply buried somewhere like a dog. And why then was she
not summoned for proper trial? Because, obviously, some
hot-headed avenger killed her on the spot instead. Was it
Henricus? Obviously not; if Henricus had punished Katerina
by killing her, old Jesek might well have approved; but why
then would the king have criticized Jesek later for his violent
temper? It follows from this that Jesek, her enraged father,
did away with Katerina. And now the question is, who
killed Henricus in combat? Who did that, sir?”
“I don’t know,” the archivist sighed plaintively.
“Who else but Jesek?” shouted Dr. Mejzlik. “There’s no
one else who could have done it! That’s the only way we
come full circle in the whole affair, can’t you see that? Look
at it this way: Katerina, wife of Petr Berkovec, was — hm,
how to put it — was burning with sinful desire for his
younger brother, Henricus.”
“Do you have evidence of that?” asked Mr. Divisek,
enormously interested.
“It follows from a logical process,” Dr. Mejzlik said
decisively. “Listen, it’s either money or a woman; you can
take that as a given. To what extent Henricus returned that
passion, I don’t know; but we have to look for a motive
here, a reason for Kate to have murdered her husband. And
I can tell you right now,” Dr. Mejzlik declared in an authoritative
voice, “that she did it!”
“I suspected that,” the archivist sighed gloomily.
“And now her father, Jesek Skalicky, arrives on the
scene as avenger of the family honor. He kills his daughter
because he doesn’t want to turn her over to the hangman;
and afterwards he challenges Henricus to a duel, because
that unfortunate young man is more or less an accessory to
the crime and to the damnation of his only daughter.
112
Henricus falls in the duel, sword in hand. Of course there’s
an alternative here: Henricus shields Katerina from her
enraged father with his own body and falls in the duel. But
the first alternative is better. Thus you have the woeful
deeds. And King Jiri, because he perceives how seldom
human judgment is called upon to judge an act so savagely
righteous, quite reasonably abandons this appalling father,
this violent avenger, to divine justice. A decent jury might
have done the same. Within the year, old Jesek dies alone
and grief-stricken, probably of heart failure.”
“Amen,” said archivist Divisek, clasping his hands.
“That’s how it was. The King Jiri I know could not have
acted otherwise. Listen, that Jesek was a harsh and splendid
character, wasn’t he? It’s all perfectly clear now; you can see
it right before your eyes. And the way everything fits together,”
the archivist marveled. “Sir, you have performed an
invaluable service to historical scholarship. This casts such a
dramatic light on the people of that era, and indeed — ”
Mr. Divisek, overcome with gratitude, threw out his hands
with a flourish. “When my History of the Reign of King Jiri
of Podebrady is published, I will take the liberty, sir, of
sending you a copy, and there you will see how I deal with
this case as a scholar.”
Some time after that, Dr. Mejzlik really did receive the
impressive volume titled The History of the Reign of King
Jiri of Podebrady, with a warm inscription from the archivist
Divisek. He read the entire book from A to Z, for — let us
admit it — he was quite proud of his contribution to a
scholarly work; but he found nothing there until, on page
471, among the bibliographical notes, he read the following:
Sebek, Jaroslav, Regesta XIVth and XVth Centuries, p. 213,
letter from Sir Ladislav Pchac of Olesna to Sir Jan Borsovsky
of Cercany. Of interest is the comment concerning Sir Jesek
113
Skalicky of Skalice, which merits particular attention but has
not thus far been subjected to proper scholarly methodology.
114
The Record
“Your Honor,” Officer Hejda announced to District Judge
Tucek, “I’ve got a serious bodily injury for you. God in
heaven, it’s hot out there!”
“So make yourself comfortable,” the judge advised him.
Officer Hejda propped his rifle in a corner, slung his
helmet to the floor, and unbuttoned his coat. “Oof,” he said.
“That damned scoundrel! I’ve never had a case like this one
before, Your Honor. Take a look.” So saying, he lifted up a
heavy object he’d deposited earlier by the door, loosened the
knot of the blue kerchief in which it was swathed, and
unwrapped a stone as big as a human head. “Just take a
look at this,” he repeated earnestly.
“What’s it supposed to be?” asked the judge, scraping
at the stone with a pencil. “Piece of limestone, isn’t it?”
“It is, and it’s a whopper,” Officer Hejda confirmed.
“So here’s my report, Your Honor: Vaclav Lysicky,
brickmaker, age nineteen years, residence the brickyard, got
that down? struck or hit with this stone, hereby attached as
evidence, weight thirteen pounds, two ounces, Frantisek
Pudil, farmer, residence Dolni Ujezd number 14, got that
down? on the left shoulder, as a result of which said individual
suffered a dislocated shoulder, fractured arm and
collarbone, bleeding wound in the shoulder muscle, and a
torn tendon and rotator cuff, got that down?”
“Got it,” said the judge. “But what’s so special about
it?”
“It’ll knock you for a loop, Your Honor,” Officer Hejda
vowed emphatically. “I’ll tell it to you just the way it happened.
It was three days ago when this Pudil sent for me.
115
You know him, Your Honor.”
“Yes, I know him,” said the judge. “We had him in here
once for usury and once — hm — ”
“It was on account of that illegal card game. Anyway,
it’s that same Pudil. He’s got that cherry orchard that goes
all the way down to the river, you know; it’s where the river
bends back on itself and that’s why it’s wider there than
anyplace else. Anyway, Pudil sends for me that morning on
account of something’s happened to him, and where do I
find him but in bed, groaning and swearing something
terrible. According to what he says, the night before, he’s
out in his orchard looking over his cherries, and he catches
some kid red-handed up in a tree stuffing cherries in his
pockets. Well, this Pudil’s a pretty rough customer, you
know; so he unstraps his belt, pulls the kid out of the tree
by his leg, and gives him a good hard thrashing with his
belt. And at that very moment someone calls over to him
from the other bank, ‘Pudil, turn loose of that kid!’ This
Pudil’s eyesight isn’t so good, I think it’s on account of all
his drinking; he can just barely make out somebody on the
other side of the river standing there staring at him. That’s
why he says, just to be on the safe side, ‘Mind your own
business, troublemaker,’ and whomps on the kid even more.
‘Pudil,’ hollers the man on the other bank, ‘turn loose of
that kid, you hear me?’ Pudil’s thinking to himself, what can
he do to me, and that’s why he shouts, ‘Stick it in your ear,
fathead!’ No sooner does he say it than he’s laying flat on
the ground with this godawful pain in his left shoulder; and
the man on the other bank goes, ‘That’ll teach you, you
stupid farmer!’ Listen, they had to carry this Pudil away, I
mean he couldn’t even stand up; and right there next to
him’s this stone. So they went to get the doctor that same
night. The doctor wants them to take Pudil to the hospital,
on account of his bones are all smashed to slivers; they say
his whole left arm’ll be lame from here on out. Only this
Pudil doesn’t want to go to the hospital on account of he’s
116
harvesting. So the next morning he sends for me and says I
have to search for that moron, that rotten rat that did it to
him. Fair enough.
“But listen, when they showed me that stone, I just
stood there gawking at it. I mean, it’s limestone, but there’s
some kind of pyrite in it, so it’s a lot heavier than it looks.
Lift it yourself. I figured it was about thirteen pounds, threeand-
a-half ounces — turns out I was only off by one-and-ahalf
ounces. Believe me, to throw a stone like this you’d
really have to know how to throw. Then I take a look at
that orchard and the river. Where the grass was all squashed
was where Pudil toppled over, and from there it was over six
feet to the water’s edge; and that river, Your Honor, at first
glance that river looked to be a good forty-five, forty-six feet
wide, because that’s where it bends around. Your Honor, I
start yelling and jumping and I’m saying somebody get me
about sixty, sixty-five feet of line right away! When they
bring it I drive a stick in the spot where Pudil toppled, tie
the line to it, strip down, and swim to the other bank with
the end of the line in my teeth. And guess what, Your
Honor: that line was barely long enough to make it to the
other side, and after that comes a portion of the bank, and
not until then do you have this little footpath. I measured it
three times; from the stick to the footpath it’s sixty-three
feet, two-and-three-quarters inches on the nose.”
“Hejda,” said the judge, “that can’t be right. Sixty-three
feet, that’s one long distance. Listen, wasn’t this man standing
in the water, like maybe in the middle of the river?”
“That’s what I thought, too!” replied Officer Hejda.
“Your Honor, from one side to the other it’s well over six
feet deep, on account of that curve in the river there. And
there’s still a big hole in the bank from where the stone was;
the bank over there’s sort of paved over, you know, so the
water won’t wear it away. That man for sure pulled that
stone out of the embankment, but he could only of pitched
it from the footpath, because he couldn’t of stood in the
117
water and he would of skidded on the embankment. What
that means is, he threw it the whole sixty-three feet, twoand-
three-quarters inches.”
“Maybe he had a slingshot,” the judge said uncertainly.
Officer Hejda looked at him reproachfully. “Your
Honor, you must of never shot a slingshot before. Just try to
shoot a thirteen-pound stone from a slingshot; what you’d
need is a catapult. Your Honor, I sweated over this stone for
two days. I tried to put some kind of noose around it and
sling it; you know, like the hammerthrow. I want to tell you,
it slipped out of the noose every time. Sir, it was a clean
toss, just like a shot put. And you know,” he burst out in
his excitement, “you know what that is? It’s a world record,
that’s what.”
“You’re kidding,” the judge said in astonishment.
“A world record,” Officer Hejda repeated solemnly.
“Only the regulation shot is heavier: it weighs fifteen
pounds, six-and-three-quarters ounces, and this year’s record
in the shotput is something like fifty-two-and-a-half feet. For
nineteen years, sir, the record was fifty feet, ten-and-a-half
inches, but last year some American, what was his name?
Kuck or Hirschfeld or something, he threw it almost fiftytwo-
and-a-half feet. So something like a thirteen-pound shot
would go sixty-two feet, four inches. And what we have here
is seven-and-a-quarter inches more! Your Honor, this man
could throw a shot a good fifty-three feet without even
practicing! Sweet Jesus, fifty-three feet! Your Honor, I’m an
old shot-putter. When our unit was in Siberia, the boys were
always yelling, Hejda, toss one over there — actually, that
was hand grenades, you know. And in Vladivostok I was
throwing with these American sailors; I put the shot fortysix
feet, but their chaplain put it a couple of inches more. I
want to tell you, we were really in shape in Siberia! But this
stone here, sir, I could only throw it fifty feet, ten-and-aquarter
inches; I couldn’t get anything more out of me or it.
Sixty-three feet! By God, I said to myself, I’ve got to get my
118
hands on this fellow; he’ll break the record for us. Think of
it, swiping the record from the Americans!”
“What about Pudil?” the judge objected.
“The hell with Pudil,” cried Officer Hejda. “Your
Honor, I straight off launched a search for this unknown
breaker of the world record; well, it’s in the national interest,
isn’t it? But first I had to guarantee that he wouldn’t get
penalized for what he did to Pudil.”
“Now just a moment there,” the judge protested.
“Wait; I only guaranteed it if he for sure throws a
thirteen pound, two-ounce stone across the river. Don’t
worry, I just explained about how it’d be this glorious feat
and how the whole world’d read about us; and I said that
whoever it was would bring in crowds by the thousands.
Good grief, Your Honor, from that moment on all the young
men for miles around drop their harvesting and rush to the
dock so they can throw stones to the other side of the river.
That embankment’s already completely busted, so now
they’re breaking up boundary markers and knocking down
stone walls for something to throw. And the boys, the whole
worthless lot of them, are throwing stones all over the
village — you wouldn’t believe the number of dead chickens
there. And I’m standing on the embankment and supervising;
of course, nobody throws farther than the middle of the
river — Your Honor, there’ll be a rise in that riverbed for
sure, what with those stones halfway blocking it up already.
Then along towards evening they bring this young man over
to me, and they’re saying he’s the one who flattened Pudil
with that stone. You’ll see him yourself, the damned scoundrel,
he’s waiting outside. ‘Listen, Lysicka,’ I tell him, ‘you
threw this stone at Pudil?’ ‘Sure,’ he says, ‘Pudil cussed me
out, and I got mad, and that was the only stone around — ‘
‘So here’s another stone just like it,’ says I, ‘now throw it as
far as Pudil’s side. But if you don’t make it, you shifty
rascal, you’ll be sorry right down to your socks!’
“So he picks up the stone — he’s got paws like shovels
119
— and he takes a stance at the edge of the footpath, and he
aims. I’m watching him, he’s got no technique, no style, he
isn’t using his legs or his trunk, and splat! he throws the
stone in the water maybe forty-six feet. That’s not bad, you
know, but — All right, I’ll show him how to do it: ‘Look,
knucklehead, you have to position yourself like this, right
shoulder back, and when you throw, you have to thrust with
your shoulder at the same time, understand?’ ‘Sure,’ says he,
and then he twists all around like a saint at the stake and
splat! he throws the stone thirty feet.
“You know, that made me mad. ‘You trickster,’ I yell,
‘you popped Pudil? You’re lying!’ ‘Officer Hejda, sir,’ he
says, ‘God’s truth I popped him. You put Pudil there and I’ll
hit him again, the mean, no-good snake.’ Your Honor, I run
back to Pudil and I beg him, ‘Mr. Pudil, sir, look, there’s a
world record on the line here. Please, go cuss him out again
from your side so this brickmaker’ll throw at you one more
time.’ And you won’t believe this, Your Honor: this Pudil
says no way is he going back there, not for nothing. You see
how it is? These people just don’t have any public spirit.
“So back I go again to Vaclav the brickmaker. ‘You
phony,’ I yell at him, ‘it’s not true you clobbered Pudil. Pudil
says it was somebody else.’ ‘That’s a lie,’ says Lysicky, ‘I did
too do it.’ ‘Then,’ says I, ‘show me if you can throw that
far!’ This Lysicky only scratches himself and kind of smiles.
‘Officer Hejda, sir,’ says he, ‘I can’t do it just cold like that.
When I pegged Pudil, I was really burned up.’ ‘Vaclav,’ I tell
him, peaceful like, ‘you throw it over there, I let you go; you
don’t throw it over there, you sit in prison for serious bodily
injury, on account of you crippled Pudil. You scoundrel,
you’ll get six months for it.’ ‘So I’ll sit it out while it’s
winter,’ says Vaclav; so I arrested him in the name of the
law.
“Now he’s waiting out there in the hall. Your Honor, if
you’d just get it out of him if he really threw that stone or if
he’s just bragging! I think he’s scared and backing down. But
120
slap him with at least a month for misleading the authorities,
or anyway fraud. After all, lying’s just not allowed in
sports, you know; there’d be a severe penalty for that, sir.
I’ll bring him in.”
“So you’re Vaclav Lysicky,” the district judge said, looking
austerely at the fair-haired delinquent. “You’ve confessed
that you threw this stone at Frantisek Pudil with intent to
harm and that you inflicted serious bodily injury. Is this
true?”
“Please, Your Honor, sir,” began the culprit, “it was like
this: this Pudil is walloping some kid there, and I holler
across the river at him to leave off, and he starts cussing me
out — ”
“Did you throw this stone or not?” snapped the judge.
“Please, sir, I threw it,” the culprit said penitently, “but
he was cussing me out, so I grabbed hold of that stone — ”
“Damn it, man,” cried the judge, “why are you lying?
Don’t you know there’s a grave penalty for trying to bamboozle
the authorities? We know very well you didn’t throw
that stone!”
“I threw it, sir,” stammered the young brickmaker, “but
that Pudil said to me, stick it in your ear — ”
The judge looked questioningly at Officer Hejda, who
shrugged his shoulders helplessly. “Strip down, you,” the
judge thundered at the miserable offender. “I mean now —
your pants, too! Do it!”
Now the young giant stood as God had created him,
and he was shaking. No doubt he was terror-stricken that he
would be tortured and that this was all part and parcel of
being under arrest.
“Take a look at those deltoids, Hejda,” said Judge
Tucek. “And those biceps — what do you say to them?”
“Hm, he could have done it,” Officer Hejda expertly
supposed. “But his abdominals could use some work. Your
121
Honor, you need abdominals in the shot put, you know, so
you can swivel your trunk. I could show you my abdominals
— !”
“Those are abdominals if I ever saw them,” muttered
the judge. “Just look at those bulges. Good grief, what a rib
cage,” he said, sticking a finger into the yellow down on
Vaclav’s chest. “But those legs are weak; these country boys
tend to have bad legs.”
“On account of they don’t bend their knees,” Officer
Hejda said critically. “Those aren’t any kind of legs. A
thrower’s got to have first-rate legs, sir!”
“Turn around,” the judge barked at the young
brickmaker. “What about the back?”
“That part up around the shoulders there’s good,”
Officer Hejda ventured, “but down below, nothing; the man
has no power in his trunk. Your Honor, what I think is, he
didn’t throw it.”
“Get dressed, you,” the judge fired at the brickmaker.
“Listen, young man, for the last time: did you throw that
stone or not?”
“I threw it,” Vaclav Lysicky mumbled with mulish
obstinacy.
“You jackass,” sputtered the judge, “if you threw that
stone, then it’s serious bodily injury and you come before the
district court and get several months, understand? So quit
your bragging and confess that you trumped up this whole
business with the stone. I’ll give you three days, for misleading
the authorities, and then you can go. So which is it, did
you hit Pudil with that stone or not?”
“I did,” Vaclav Lysicky said stubbornly. “He was
cussing me out there across the river — ”
“Get him out of here,” roared the district judge.
“Damned scoundrel!”
No more than a moment later, Officer Hejda stuck his
head around the door once again. “Your Honor,” he said
vengefully, “you can get him for property damage, too. He
122
pulled that stone out of the embankment, you know, and
now the embankment’s all broke to pieces.”
123
The Selvin Case
“Hm, my greatest success, that is, the success which gave me
the greatest pleasure — ” reminisced the old master Leonard
Unden, great poet, Nobel laureate, and so forth. “My young
friends, at my age a man no longer gives a damn for laurels,
ovations, mistresses, and similar nonsense, especially when
they’ve long been a thing of the past. When a man’s young
he enjoys it all, and he’d be a fool if he didn’t. The only
drawback is that when he’s young, he doesn’t have the
wherewithal to enjoy things. Actually, life ought to proceed
in reverse: first a man would be old and do his fullest and
most praiseworthy work, because he isn’t fit for anything
else; only later would he arrive at his youth, so that he
could enjoy the fruits of his long life. You see how an old
man rambles on. What was I going to talk about? Oh yes,
my greatest success. I’ll tell you, it wasn’t any of my dramas
or any of my books — and there truly was a time when my
books were read. My greatest success was the Selvin Case.
“Of course, you can’t be expected to know what it was
all about; why, it must be twenty-six, no, twenty-nine years
ago now. Yes, it was twenty-nine years ago, on a beautiful
day, when a diminutive, white-haired woman dressed in
black came to see me. And before I could ask her, with that
courtesy of mine which was so greatly appreciated then,
what it was she wanted, plop, she had knelt down on the
floor in front of me and broken into tears. I don’t know
why it is, but I can’t bear to see a woman cry.
“‘Sir,’ the old woman said when I had calmed her
somewhat, ‘you are a poet. I beg you, in the name of your
love for your fellow human beings, save my son! Surely
124
you’ve read in the papers about the Frank Selvin case — ‘
“I think I must have seemed a bearded baby; although I
read the papers, I hadn’t noticed anything about a Frank
Selvin. At any rate, so far as I could understand in the midst
of her sobbing and wailing, the situation was this: Her only
son, Frank Selvin, twenty-two years old, had been sentenced
that very day to penal servitude for life, for the murder and
attempted robbery of his Aunt Sofie. What exacerbated the
circumstances in the eyes of the jury was that he refused to
confess to his deed. ‘But he’s innocent, sir,’ grieved Mrs.
Selvinova, ‘he’s innocent, I swear it! On that terrible evening
he said to me: I’ve got a headache, Mother, I’m going out
for a stroll. Sir, that’s why he can’t prove his alibi! Who’d
take any notice of a young man at night, even if they happened
to meet up with him? My Frank was a bit of an
impetuous boy, but you were young once yourself; just think
of it, sir, he’s only twenty-two! How can they destroy a
young man’s whole life like that?’ And so on. I tell you, if
you could have seen that broken-hearted, white-haired
mother, you’d have realized what I realized at the time: that
one of the worst agonies is to feel sympathy for someone
when you’re powerless to help. Well, I’ll tell you what I did:
in the end I swore to her that I would do everything I
possibly could, and that I would not stop until the matter
had been resolved, and that I believed in the innocence of
her son. At these words she tried to kiss my hand. When the
poor old thing blessed me, it was all I could do not to kneel
before her in turn. You know how foolish you can look
when someone is thanking you as if you were the Lord God
Himself.
“And so, from that moment on, the Frank Selvin Case
became my personal cause. Needless to say, I began by
studying the trial record. I tell you, never in my life have I
seen a trial conducted in such a slipshod manner; it was,
patently, a judicial scandal. The case itself was fairly simple:
One night, the maid of the Aunt Sofie in question, a certain
125
Anna Solarova, fifty years old and mentally deficient, heard
someone moving about in her mistress’s, that is to say, Aunt
Sofie’s bedroom. She went to see why her mistress wasn’t
asleep, and upon entering the bedroom she saw the window
wide open and a man’s figure leaping from the window into
the garden. She let out an ear-splitting scream; and when the
neighbors arrived with a light, they found Miss Sofie lying
on the floor, strangled with her own scarf. The wardrobe
where she kept her money had been broken open and some
of the linen scattered about; the money was still there —
obviously, at that moment the maid had interrupted the
murderer. This, then, was the materia facti.
“The next day, Frank Selvin was arrested. The maid, it
appeared, had testified that she recognized the young man as
he was leaping from the window. It was established that he
was not home at that time: he returned home about half an
hour later and went straight to bed. Further, it was brought
out that the reckless young man was in debt. Further, some
busybody had been found who’d testified, importantly, that
Aunt Sofie had confided in her a few days prior to the
murder: supposedly, her nephew Frank had come to her, cap
in hand, for a loan. When she refused — she was frightfully
stingy, by the way — Frank supposedly had said: Watch out,
Aunt Sofie, something’s going to happen that’ll make people
sit up and take notice! — And that was all, insofar as Frank
was concerned.
“And now consider the trial itself: it lasted half a day,
from start to finish. Frank Selvin simply maintained that he
was innocent, that he had gone for a walk, after which he
went straight home to bed. None of the witnesses was crossexamined.
Frank’s attorney — court-appointed, naturally,
since Mrs. Selvinova had no money for a better defense —
was an easy-going old fool who confined himself to directing
attention to the youth of his injudicious client and, with
tears in his eyes, imploring the kindhearted jurors to be
lenient. Nor did the public prosecutor take many pains over
126
his job: he thundered at the jury for twice returning verdicts
of not guilty just prior to Frank Selvin’s trial; where, he
demanded, was society headed if every crime was protected
by the loose tolerance and leniency of juries? — It appears
that the jury gave heed to this argument and wanted to
make it clear that there would be no complaints about their
laxness or lenience. They simply decided, eleven to one, that
Frank Selvin was guilty of the crime of murder. That, then,
was the entire case.
“Let me tell you, once I found all this out I felt absolutely
desperate. I was boiling with rage, even though I’m
not a lawyer or, perhaps, precisely because I’m not a lawyer.
Just imagine: the star witness is mentally deficient; on top of
that, she’s nearly fifty years old and thus likely experiencing
menopause, which might well lessen her reliability. It was
nighttime when she saw that figure in the window; as I
found out later, it had been a warm night but very dark, so
she couldn’t have recognized the man with any degree of
certainty. You can’t even determine the height of a person
with any accuracy in the dark; I tested that very thoroughly
for myself. And in addition to everything else, the woman
hated young Frank Selvin in a manner that was nothing
short of hysterical, because he used to make fun of her. It
seems that he called her ‘Hebe, the white-handed cupbearer,’
which for some reason she considered a mortal
insult.
“Another point: Aunt Sofie hated her sister, Mrs.
Selvinova, and in point of fact they never spoke. The spinster
couldn’t even bring herself to speak of Frank’s mother
by her proper name. If Aunt Sofie said that Frank had
threatened her in some way, it could very well have been
some spiteful, old-maidish accusation that she’d concocted
for the purpose of humiliating her sister. As for Frank, he
was a young man of average talents, a clerk in some office.
He had a girlfriend to whom he wrote sentimental letters
and bad verse, and he fell into debt, as they say, through no
127
fault of his own. It was because of his excessive sentimentality
that he became a habitual drinker. His mother, poor
woman, was a paragon of goodness, afflicted with cancer,
poverty, and grief. Well, that was how things looked on
closer inspection.
“Of course, you couldn’t possibly know what I was like
in the days of my youth. Once my passions were aroused,
there was no holding me back. I wrote a series of newspaper
articles titled ‘The Frank Selvin Case;’ point by point I
demonstrated the unreliability of the witnesses, particularly
the star witness. I analyzed discrepancies in the testimony as
well as the bias in some of the depositions; I argued the
absurdity of presuming that the state’s witness could have
recognized the culprit; I demonstrated the utter incompetence
of the judge and the flagrant demagoguery of the public
prosecutor’s summation. But that wasn’t enough for me.
While I was at it, I began to attack the entire judicial establishment,
the penal code, the jury system, the whole callous,
selfish order of society. Don’t even ask about the uproar that
resulted. I had already made somewhat of a name for myself
at the time, and the younger generation took my side; in
fact, there was even a demonstration in front of the courthouse.
At that point young Selvin’s attorney came running to
see me, wringing his hands over what he considered the
difficulties I had caused. He said that he’d already filed an
appeal and that Selvin’s sentence would undoubtedly have
been commuted to a few years’ imprisonment, but that the
court of appeals could not be expected to yield to mobs in
the street and would therefore dismiss his appeal. I told the
worthy counselor that I was not concerned only with the
Selvin Case, that what concerned me were the larger questions
of truth and justice.
“Selvin’s attorney was right: the appeal was dismissed.
But the judge was pensioned off. That was when, my young
friends, I let myself go with a vengeance. Do you know, even
today I’d call it a holy war for justice. No question about it,
128
many things have changed for the better since those days,
and you have to admit that I deserve a small part of the
credit. The Selvin Case found its way into newspapers in
every corner of the globe. I gave speeches to workers in
taverns and to delegates from all over the world at international
congresses. ‘Reverse the Selvin Decision’ was, in its
time, as much of an international rallying cry as, say, ‘No
More War!’ or ‘Votes for Women!’ When Selvin’s mother
died, seventeen thousand people followed the coffin of that
tiny, wizened woman, and over her open grave I spoke as I
had never spoken before in my life. God knows, friends,
inspiration is a strange and formidable thing.
“For seven years I waged that war, and that war was
the making of me. It was not my books but the Selvin Case
that gained me a worldwide reputation. — They call me the
Voice of Conscience, the Knight of Truth, and things of that
sort; some of them will even be on my tombstone. No doubt
for some fourteen years or so after my death, the schoolbooks
will relate how the poet Leonard Unden fought for
truth; then that, too, will be forgotten.
“In that seventh year the star witness, Anna Solarova,
died. Before her death she confessed and admitted in tears
that her conscience was troubling her. She had, she said,
given false evidence at the trial; in truth, she could not say
that the murderer in the window was Frank Selvin. The
priest, a well-meaning man, brought the information to me.
By that time I had a better understanding of the ways of this
world, and that’s why I didn’t go to the newspapers but
rather sent the good priest to the courthouse. Within a week
a new trial was ordered for Frank Selvin. Within a month
Frank Selvin once again stood before a jury. A first-rate
lawyer pulverized the prosecution’s case, free of charge,
whereupon the public prosecutor rose and recommended that
the jury acquit Frank Selvin. And the jury decreed by unanimous
vote that Frank Selvin was not guilty.
“Yes, that was the greatest triumph of my life. No other
129
success gave me such pure satisfaction — — and, at the
same time, such a feeling of emptiness. Truth be told, I
began to miss the Selvin Case — it left a curious void in its
wake. Then one day my maid announced that some man
wanted to speak to me.
“‘I am Frank Selvin,’ said the man, and he remained
standing in the doorway. And I felt — I don’t quite know
how to tell you — I felt disappointed, somehow, that this
Selvin of mine looked like . . . I have to admit it, like a
lottery agent: a bit fleshy and pasty-faced, with the beginnings
of baldness, somewhat sweaty and extremely commonplace;
moreover, he reeked of beer.
“‘Esteemed and illustrious bard,’ stammered Frank
Selvin (imagine calling me ‘esteemed and illustrious bard’ —
I could have kicked him!). ‘I have come to express my
thanks to you . . . my greatest benefactor.’ It sounded as if
he had learned it by rote. ‘I will be indebted to you for the
rest of my life. Words of gratitude are too weak — ‘
“‘Not at all,’ I said quickly, ‘it was my duty. Once I
was convinced that you had been wrongly condemned — ‘
“Frank Selvin shook his head. ‘Gifted bard,’ he said
plaintively, ‘I would never try to lie to my benefactor. The
fact is, I killed the witch.’
“‘If that’s the case,’ I exploded, ‘why didn’t you say so
in court?’
“Frank Selvin gazed at me reproachfully. ‘Gifted bard,’
he said, ‘that was my right. A defendant has the right to
plead innocent, does he not?’
“I must admit that I was stunned. ‘What do you want
from me now?’ I demanded.
“‘I have come to you, gifted bard, only to thank you
for your magnanimity,’ Selvin said in a mournful tone
which, apparently, he regarded as deeply moving. ‘You gave
your support to my poor old mother, too. God’s blessing on
you, noble poet!’
“‘Get out!’ I screamed insanely. The fellow flew down
130
the stairs like a shot. Three weeks later he stopped me in the
street; he was slightly drunk. I couldn’t get rid of him. For
quite a while I couldn’t understand what it was he wanted,
until he grabbed my lapels and explained. He said I’d ruined
his life: if I hadn’t written about his case, the appeals court
would have granted his attorney a hearing and he, Frank
Selvin, wouldn’t have spent seven years, blamelessly, in
prison. The very least I could do now, he said, would be to
show some consideration for his straitened circumstances,
for which I was at fault through having interfered in his
trial. In short, I had to slip some money into his hand.
‘God’s blessing on you, benefactor,’ Mr. Selvin said in
conclusion, his eyes moist.
“On the second occasion he approached me more
menacingly. He said that, thanks to his case, I’d done very
well for myself; but I had gained fame only because I’d
taken up his cause, so why shouldn’t he get something out
of it? I was entirely unable to convince him that I owed him
nothing in the way of a commission. I simply gave him more
money.
“From that time on he confronted me at shorter and
shorter intervals. He would sit on the sofa and sigh that he
was suffering remorse for having done in the witch. ‘I’m
going to give myself up, noble bard,’ he’d say gloomily, ‘but
for you it would be an international disgrace. Still, I don’t
see how else to attain peace of mind.’ — I tell you, those fits
of remorse must have been frightful, judging by what I paid
out to that fellow so that he could continue to suffer
through them. Finally I bought him a ticket to America;
whether he found peace of mind there, I don’t know.
“Well, that was the greatest success of my life. My
young friends, when you write an obituary for Leonard
Unden, say that with the Selvin Case he engraved his name
on our hearts in golden characters, and so on; our thanks to
him forevermore.”
131
Footprints
That night Mr. Rybka was walking home in a particularly
good mood, first because he’d won his game of chess (that
was a nice checkmate with the knight, he congratulated
himself as he walked along), and second because fresh snow
had fallen and it crunched softly beneath his feet in the fine,
pure silence. Good heavens it’s beautiful, thought Mr.
Rybka; a city covered with snow is all of a sudden such a
small town, such an old-fashioned little place — it almost
makes you believe in night watchmen and horse-drawn
carriages; it’s funny how snow makes everything seem
timeless and rustic.
Crunch, crunch, Mr. Rybka looked around for an
untrodden path, just for the joy of hearing the crunch; and
because he lived on a quiet back lane, he came upon fewer
and fewer footprints. Look, a man’s boots and a woman’s
shoes turned in at this gate, probably husband and wife — I
wonder if it’s a young couple, Mr. Rybka said to himself
softly, as if he wanted to give them his blessing. Over there
a cat had run across the road and left its pawprints, like
blossoms, in the snow; good night, kitty, your feet are going
to be cold. And now there was only a single chain of footprints,
the deep prints of a man, a clear and distinct chain of
steps unfurled by a lone pedestrian. Which of the neighbors
came this way? Mr. Rybka asked himself with friendly
concern; so few people walk by here, there’s not a single
wheel tread in the snow, we’re on the outskirts of life. When
I reach home, the street will pull its white feather-bed up to
its nose and dream that it’s only a child’s plaything. It’s too
bad the old newspaper lady will trample all over it in the
132
morning; her footprints will criss-cross it like a rabbit’s —
Suddenly Mr. Rybka stopped. Just as he was going to
cross the snow-bright street to his house, he saw that the
chain of footprints in front of him turned away from the
sidewalk and continued into the street in the direction of his
gate. Who could have come to see me? he asked himself in
surprise, and his eyes followed the clear, distinct footprints.
There were five of them, and right in the middle of the
street they came to an end with the sharp impression of a
left foot. Beyond that there was nothing but immaculate,
untouched snow.
I must be crazy, Mr. Rybka said to himself — the man
must have gone back to the sidewalk! — But as far as he
could see, the sidewalk was nothing but smooth, powdery
snow, without a single human footprint. Well I’ll be damned,
Mr. Rybka marveled, I guess the rest of the footprints are
over on the other sidewalk! And so he walked in a wide arc
around the incomplete chain of footprints, but there was not
a single mark on the other sidewalk; and farther on, the
entire street was lighted by the soft, untouched snow, so
pure it took his breath away. No one had passed that way
since the snow had begun to fall. That’s odd, Mr. Rybka
muttered, the man must have walked backwards to the
sidewalk, stepping in his own footsteps; but he would’ve had
to walk backwards in his footprints all the way to the
corner, because there was only one set of tracks in front of
me there, and they were headed in the same direction I was.
But why would the fellow do such a thing? Mr. Rybka asked
himself in amazement. And how could he fit his own footprints
to a T if he was going backwards?
Turning his head away, he unlocked the gate and went
into his house. Although he knew it was nonsense, he
wondered if there might not be some snowy footprints inside
the house; of course not, how would they get there! Maybe I
only imagined it, Mr. Rybka muttered uneasily, and he
leaned out the window. By the light of the street lamp he
133
could clearly see the five sharp, deep footprints that ended in
the middle of the street, and then nothing. Dammit, thought
Mr. Rybka, rubbing his eyes; once I read a story about a
single footprint in the snow, but here’s a whole row of them,
and then suddenly nothing — where did that fellow go?
Shaking his head, he began to undress; but suddenly he
stopped, went to the telephone and, his voice somewhat
strained, called the police station. “Hello? Captain Bartosek?
Look, there’s something peculiar going on here, very peculiar
— Maybe if you could send somebody over here or, better
yet, come yourself — All right then, I’ll be waiting for you
at the corner — I don’t know what’s going on — No, I
don’t think it’s dangerous; the only thing is, nobody should
trample on the footprints — I don’t know whose footprints!
Fine, I’ll be waiting for you.”
Mr. Rybka put his clothes back on and went out again.
He went carefully around the footprints and took care not
to disturb them even on the sidewalk. Shivering with cold
and excitement, he waited at the corner for Captain
Bartosek. It was silent, and the peopled earth shone peacefully
out into space.
“At least it’s nice and quiet,” Captain Bartosek
grumbled cheerlessly. “Up to now, we’ve been dealing with a
free-for-all and a drunk. Phooey! — So what’ve you got
here?”
“Take a look at these footprints, Captain,” Mr. Rybka
said, his voice quavering. “Here’s where they start.”
The captain turned on his flashlight. “He was pretty
lanky, almost six feet,” he said, “judging by the size of the
prints and the length of his stride. Pretty good boots, handmade,
I’d guess. He wasn’t drunk and he was moving right
along. I don’t know what it is you don’t like about these
footprints.”
“That,” Mr. Rybka said briefly, and he pointed to the
incomplete chain of prints in the middle of the street.
“Aha,” Captain Bartosek remarked, and without further
134
ceremony he headed straight for the final footprint, squatted
on his haunches, and shone his flashlight down. “Nothing
wrong with it,” he said comfortably. “It’s a good, solid,
perfectly normal footprint. His weight rested more on the
heel. If the man had taken another step or jumped, his
weight would have shifted to his toes, see? It’s obvious.”
“And that means — ?” Mr. Rybka asked in intense
anticipation.
“What it means,” the captain said placidly, “is that he
didn’t go any farther.”
“Then where did he go?” Rybka burst out feverishly.
The captain shrugged his shoulders. “I don’t know. Do
you suspect him of something?”
“Suspect him?” Mr. Rybka said, astonished. “I only
want to know where he went. Look, if he took his last step
here, then where, for Christ’s sake, did he take the next one?
I mean, there aren’t any more footprints here!”
“I can see that,” the captain said drily. “So what do
you care where he went? Is it someone from your family? Is
somebody missing? Then what the hell difference does it
make to you where he’s gone?”
“But there must be some explanation,” Mr. Rybka
faltered. “Do you think maybe he walked backwards in his
own footprints?”
“Nonsense,” growled the captain. “When you walk
backwards, you take shorter steps and plant your legs wider
apart to get a better balance; besides, you don’t lift your feet
up, so this man would’ve dug ruts with his heels all along
there in the snow. Those footprints were stepped in one time
only, sir. You can see how sharp they are.”
“Then if he didn’t go backwards,” Mr. Rybka insisted
stubbornly, “which direction did he go?”
“That’s his business,” grumbled the captain. “Look, if
he didn’t do anything wrong, we’ve got no right to meddle
in his affairs. We have to have some kind of charge against
him. Then, of course, we’d launch a preliminary investiga135
tion . . . ”
“But how can a man just disappear in the middle of a
street?” cried Mr. Rybka, horrified at the thought.
“You’ll just have to wait, sir,” the captain advised him
patiently. “If somebody’s disappeared, his family or someone
will notify us in a day or two, and then we’ll start searching
for him. As long as nobody misses him, though, there’s
nothing we can do. Can’t be helped.”
A dark anger began rising in Mr. Rybka. “I beg your
pardon,” he said sharply, “but I’d have thought the police
would have to be at least a bit interested when an ordinary,
peaceful pedestrian disappears for no reason at all in the
middle of the street!”
“Look, nothing’s happened to him,” Captain Bartosek
soothed him. “There’s no sign at all of a struggle — If
somebody’d attacked or kidnapped him, there’d be a slew of
footprints here — I’m sorry, sir, but there’s just no reason
for me to get involved.”
“But Captain,” Mr. Rybka threw up his hands, “at least
explain to me . . . It’s still such a mystery . . . ”
“It is,” the captain agreed thoughtfully. “You have no
idea, sir, what a lot of mysteries there are in this world.
Every house, every family is a mystery. When I was on my
way here I heard a young woman sobbing in that little
house over there. Sir, mysteries aren’t our business. We’re
paid to enforce law and order. What on earth did you think,
that we chase criminals out of curiosity? Sir, we chase them
so we can lock them up. There has to be law and order.”
“Exactly!” burst out Mr. Rybka. “But you have to
admit it’s not law and order when, right in the middle of the
street, someone . . . well, let’s say, rises straight up in the
air!”
“It’s all a matter of interpretation,” said the captain.
“There’s a police regulation to the effect that if anyone’s in
danger of falling from a great height, we have to tie him up.
First you get a warning and then you get a fine. — If the
136
gentleman just rose up in the air of his own free will, then
of course a police officer would have to warn him to strap
himself in a safety belt; but probably there wasn’t any police
officer here,” he said apologetically. “Otherwise he would
have left some footprints, too. Besides, it’s possible the
gentleman left by some other means, right?”
“But how?” asked Mr. Rybka.
Captain Bartosek shook his head. “Hard to say. Could
be some kind of Holy Ascension or Jacob’s ladder,” he said
vaguely. “Ascension could be considered kidnapping, especially
if there was an indication of violence; but I think it
usually happens with the consent of the party concerned. But
maybe the man knew how to fly. Haven’t you ever dreamed
you were flying? All you have to do is give a little push with
your feet, and up you go . . . Some people fly like balloons,
but me, when I fly in my dreams, I have to kick off from
the ground every so often; I think it’s because of this heavy
uniform and my sword. Maybe the man fell asleep and
started to fly in a dream. But there’s no law against that, sir.
Of course, on a busy street a police officer would have to
give him a warning. Or wait a minute, maybe it was levitation;
these spiritualists believe in levitation, you know. But
spiritualism isn’t against the law, either. There was this Mr.
Baudys who told me that with his own eyes he saw a medium
hanging in the air. Who knows, maybe there’s something
to it.”
“But Captain,” Mr. Rybka said reproachfully, “you
can’t really believe that! It would be a violation of the laws
of nature — ”
Captain Bartosek shrugged his shoulders in resignation.
“I know that, sir, but people violate all kinds of laws and
regulations. If you were on the force you’d see it all the time
. . . ” The captain waved his hand. “I wouldn’t be surprised
if they even violated the laws of nature. Altogether, people
are a pretty sorry bunch, sir. Well, good night to you; it’s
freezing out here.”
137
“Won’t you come in for a cup of tea . . . or a glass of
slivovice?” Mr. Rybka suggested.
“Why not?” the captain muttered dejectedly. “You can’t
even go into a tavern in uniform, you know. That’s why
policemen don’t drink much.
“Mystery,” he continued, seated in an easy chair and
gazing thoughtfully at the snow melting off the toes of his
boots. “Ninety-nine people out of a hundred would’ve
passed by those footprints and never noticed a thing. And
you yourself don’t notice ninety-nine things out of a hundred
that are damned mysterious. We’re pig-ignorant about the
things of this world. But some things aren’t mysterious. Law
and order isn’t mysterious. Justice isn’t mysterious. The
police aren’t mysterious, either. But every person walking
along the street is a mystery, because we can’t get at him,
sir. As soon as he steals something, he stops being a mystery,
because we lock him up and that’s that. At least we know
what he’s doing, and any time we want we can watch him
through his cell window, right? But I ask you, why do
newspapers print headlines like ‘Mysterious Discovery of
Corpse!’ What’s mysterious about a corpse? When we find
one, we measure it and we photograph it and we cut it up,
we know every fiber in and on it, we know what it last ate,
how it died, you name it; and besides that, we know somebody
probably killed it for money. Everything’s clear and
straightforward . . . You can pour me some more of that
black tea, sir. All crimes are clear and straightforward, sir; at
least you know the motives and things like that. But what
your cat is thinking, that’s a mystery, or what your maid
dreams about, or what’s on your wife’s mind when she’s
staring out the window. Everything’s a mystery, sir, except
criminal cases; a criminal case is a specified slice of reality
with strict definitions, a little cross-section we can hold up
to the light. If I took a look around me here, sir, I’d get to
know all kinds of things about you. But what I’m doing is
looking at the toes of my boots, because officially we’re not
138
interested in you. What I mean is, nobody’s brought any
charges against you,” he added, sipping his hot tea.
“There’s this strange notion,” he began again after a
moment, “that the police, especially detectives, are interested
in mysteries. We don’t give a damn about mysteries; what
interests us is disorderly conduct. Sir, crime doesn’t interest
us because it’s mysterious, but because it’s against the law.
We don’t chase crooks out of intellectual curiosity; we chase
them so we can arrest them in the name of the law. Listen,
streetcleaners don’t run around the streets with brooms so
they can spot people’s traces in the dust, but so they can
sweep and tidy up all the filth life leaves behind. Law and
order aren’t a bit mysterious. Keeping order is dirty work,
sir; and whoever wants to keep things clean and tidy has to
poke his fingers into all kinds of nasty stuff. Well, somebody
has to do it,” he said despondently, “just as somebody has
to slaughter calves. But slaughtering calves out of curiosity,
that’s barbaric; it should only be done as a skilled trade.
When it’s someone’s duty to do something, then at least he
knows he’s authorized to do it. Look, justice has to be as
unquestioned as the multiplication tables. I don’t know if
you could prove that every theft is wrong; but I can prove
to you that every theft is against the law, because I can
arrest you every time. If you scattered pearls in the street,
then a policeman could give you a ticket for littering. But if
you started performing miracles, we couldn’t stop you,
unless we called it a public nuisance or unlawful public
assembly. There must be some kind of breach of order for us
to intervene.”
“But Captain,” Mr. Rybka objected, wriggling with dissatisfaction,
“is that really enough for you? What happened
here is . . . is such a strange thing . . . is something so
mysterious . . . and you . . . ”
Captain Bartosek shrugged his shoulders. “And I just
brushed it aside. If you like, sir, I’ll have the footprints
removed so they don’t interfere with a good night’s sleep for
139
you. But I can’t do more that that. Did you hear something
just now? Footsteps? That’s our night patrolman, so that
means it’s seven minutes past two. Good night, sir.”
Mr. Rybka accompanied the captain to his gate. In the
middle of the street there was still the incomplete and
incomprehensible chain of footprints — A police officer was
approaching on the opposite sidewalk.
“Mimra,” Captain Bartosek called out, “anything
new?”
Officer Mimra saluted. “Not much, captain,” he reported.
“A cat was meowing over there in front of number
17, and I rang the doorbell so they’d let her in. They left the
gate open at number 9. They dug up the street at the corner
and failed to leave a red lantern, and the signboard at
Marsik the grocer’s is loose at one end; they’ll have to take
it down in the morning so it doesn’t fall on somebody’s
head.”
“That’s all?”
“That’s all,” said Officer Mimra. “They’ll have to
spread sand on the sidewalks in the morning, so nobody
breaks a leg; we’ll want to start ringing all the doorbells at
six — ”
“Everything’s in order, then,” said Captain Bartosek.
“Good night!”
Mr. Rybka took one last look at the footprints which
had led into the unknown. But where the last footprint had
been were now two wide, sturdy imprints from Officer
Mimra’s workboots; and from there his wide footprints
plodded on in a clear and continuous chain.
“Thank God,” Mr. Rybka sighed, and he went to bed.
140
The Receipt
That hot August evening the outdoor café on Strelecky
Island was crowded, so Minka and Pepa had to seat themselves
at a table that was already occupied by a gentleman
with a bushy, drooping moustache. “If you don’t mind,” said
Pepa, and the gentleman simply shook his head. (The old
nuisance, Minka said to herself, he had to sit right at our
table!) So the first thing that happened was that Minka, with
the air of a duchess, sat down on the chair which Pepa had
wiped off for her with his handkerchief. Next, without
further ado, she quickly pulled out her compact and powdered
her nose so that even in this heat, God forbid, it
wouldn’t shine a smidgen. And as she was taking out the
compact, there fell from her purse a crumpled slip of paper.
Immediately the gentleman with the moustache bent down
and retrieved it. “You ought to hang on to that, miss,” he
said gloomily.
Minka turned red, first of all because a strange gentleman
had spoken to her, and in the second place because she
was annoyed at having turned red. “Thank you,” she said,
and then she promptly turned back to Pepa. “It’s a receipt
from the shop where I buy my stockings.”
“Precisely,” said the melancholy man. “You never know,
miss, when it might be needed.”
Pepa considered it his duty as a gentleman somehow to
intervene. “What do you want to hang on to stupid bits of
paper for?” he asked, not looking at the man. “You’d have
your pockets stuffed full in no time.”
“Makes no difference,” the gentleman with the moustache
said meaningfully. “Sometimes that’s more valuable
141
than I don’t know what.”
Minka’s face acquired a strained expression. (That old
nuisance is going to poke his nose right in our conversation;
God, why didn’t we sit somewhere else!) Pepa decided to put
an end to it. “How do you mean, more valuable?” he asked
coldly, and he drew his brows together in a frown. (That’s
so becoming to him, Minka observed admiringly.)
“As a clue,” muttered the old nuisance, and in lieu of a
formal introduction he added, “What I mean is, I’m Officer
Soucek, Police Officer Soucek, see? We had a case like that
just the other day,” he said with a wave of his hand. “You
never know what you’re carrying around in your pockets.”
“What sort of case?” Pepa couldn’t help asking. (Minka
intercepted a glance from a young man at the next table.
Just wait, Pepa, I’ll fix you for not talking to me!)
“Why, the one about that woman they found way out
near Roztyly,” said the man with the moustache, and he
lapsed into silence.
Minka suddenly picked up interest, no doubt because a
woman was involved. “What woman?” she demanded
abruptly.
“Why, the one that they found out there,” Officer
Soucek mumbled evasively and, somewhat at a loss, he
fished a cigarette from his pocket. At that point something
entirely unexpected happened: Pepa hastily dug his hand into
his pocket, produced his lighter, and offered the man a light.
“I thank you,” said Officer Soucek, obviously touched
and honored. “You know, when those harvesters found that
dead woman in the cornfield there between Roztyly and
Krc,” he explained by way of expressing his gratitude and
returning the favor.
“I never heard anything about that,” said Minka, her
eyes widening. “Remember, Pepa, when we were in Krc that
time? — So what happened to her?”
“Strangled,” Officer Soucek said matter-of-factly. “She
still had the cord around her neck. I won’t say anything in
142
front of the young lady here about what she looked like;
July, you know, and when she’d already been laying there
for something like two months — ” With disgust Officer
Soucek blew out a cloud of smoke. “You wouldn’t believe
what somebody in that condition looks like. Why, their own
mother wouldn’t recognize ‘em. And the flies — ” Officer
Soucek shook his head mournfully. “Once their skin’s gone,
miss, it’s goodbye and amen to beauty. And it’s the devil’s
own job to identify somebody after that, you know. As long
as they’ve still got eyes and a nose, you can do it; but after
laying there more than a month in the sun — ”
“But there must have been a monogram somewhere on
the corpse,” offered Pepa, the expert.
“Forget monograms,” grumbled Officer Soucek. “Look,
single girls don’t put their initials on nothing, because they
tell themselves, why bother, I’ll just be getting married
anyway. That female didn’t have a single monogram on her,
so forget it!”
“And how old was she?” Minka joined in, her interest
growing.
“Maybe twenty-five, the doctor said; you know, according
to the teeth and so on. And going by her clothes, she
looked to be a factory girl or a housemaid, but most likely
she was a housemaid, because she had on this kind of
petticoat that country girls wear. And besides, if she’d been a
factory girl, probably there would’ve already been a search
on for her, because factory girls generally stick to the same
job or the same part of town. But these housemaids, when
they switch jobs nobody knows and nobody cares. That’s a
funny thing about housemaids, but it’s true. So we said to
ourselves, since it’s been two months now and nobody’s
come looking for her, then she’s got to be a housemaid. But
the main thing was that receipt.”
“What sort of receipt?” Pepa asked eagerly, for he no
doubt perceived within himself the heroic makings of a
detective, a sea captain, a Canadian trapper or the like, and
143
his face assumed the concentrated and resolute expression
required in these situations.
“Well, it was like this,” said Officer Soucek, gazing
mournfully at the ground. “We didn’t find nothing on her,
nothing. The fellow that did her in took everything that
could of been worth something. Except her left hand was
still hanging on to a piece of the strap from her purse, and
the purse minus the strap was found a little farther off in
the cornfield. Most likely he was trying to grab her purse,
too, but when the strap broke, it wasn’t worth nothing
anymore, so he threw it out in the field; but he took everything
out of it first, you know. So all that was left in it was
what had got stuck in the lining, a ticket for streetcar
number 7 and this receipt from a china shop for a fifty-fivecrown
purchase. That’s all we found.”
“But that cord around her neck,” said Pepa. “That
should’ve given you something to go on!”
Officer Soucek shook his head. “It was only a piece of
clothesline, it wasn’t any use. We had nothing at all but the
streetcar ticket and the receipt. Well, of course we told the
newspapers that a female corpse had been found, about
twenty-five years of age, gray skirt and striped blouse, and if
a housemaid had been missing for about two months, then
notify the police at once. We got over a hundred calls; May’s
the month, you know, when these housemaids usually switch
jobs, nobody knows why; but it turned out they were all
false alarms. But the amount of work you go to, checking
them all out,” Officer Soucek said gloomily. “You take some
little pot-scrubber from a house in Dejvice, say, who turns
up again somewhere in Vrsovice or Kosire, and you lose a
whole day running around. And all for nothing; the silly
thing’s not only alive and kicking, she’s laughing at you. Say,
that’s a nice tune they’re playing now,” he remarked, bobbing
his head pleasurably to the beat of Wagner’s Valkyrie
motif, which the café band was attacking with all its
strength. “Sort of sad, though, isn’t it? I’m very partial to
144
sad music. That’s why I go to all the big funerals and keep
an eye on the pickpockets.”
“But the murderer must have left some kind of clue,”
Pepa supposed.
“See that Casanova-type over there?” asked Officer
Soucek, suddenly alert. “Ordinarily he goes after collection
boxes in churches. I’d like to know what he’s up to here.
No, the murderer didn’t leave any clues. But I can tell you
this, when you find a murdered girl, then you can bet her
boyfriend did it. That’s what usually happens,” he said
bleakly. “But don’t you worry about that, young lady. We
would of known who’d done her in, but first we had to find
out who she was. That was the hard part, see.”
“But surely,” Pepa said uncertainly, “the police have
their methods.”
“Indeed they do,” Officer Soucek agreed dolefully.
“Like that method where you look for a grain of barley in a
sack of rice. You need patience, man, patience. You know, I
like to read those detective stories, all those microscopes and
things. But why would you look at that poor girl through a
microscope? Unless you wanted to see some fat, happy
maggot taking his wife and kiddies for a stroll. No offense,
miss, but it always vexes me when I hear somebody talk
about methods. It’s not like reading a book and guessing in
advance how it all turns out, you know. It’s more like they
give you a book and say: All right, Soucek, read this word
for word, and every time you come across the word ‘however,’
write down the page number. — That’s what this job’s
really like, see. No method’s going to help you, and no fancy
gimmicks, either. What you have to do is just keep on
reading, and at the end you find out there isn’t one ‘however’
in the whole book. Or else you have to run all over
Prague and track down the whereabouts of something like a
hundred Annas or Markas, until you discover, detective
style, that not a one of them’s been murdered. That’s what
somebody ought to write a book about,” he said disapprov145
ingly, “and not about the Queen of Sheba’s stolen pearl
necklace. Because that, friends, is what real detective work
is.”
“Well then, how did you go about it?” asked Pepa,
knowing beforehand that he would have gone about it in a
very different way.
“How we went about it,” repeated Officer Soucek, deep
in thought. “First off we had to start somewhere, see. Well,
to begin with we had that ticket for streetcar number 7.
Now just suppose that this girl, if she really was a housemaid,
worked in a house somewhere near that streetcar line.
That didn’t have to be true, maybe she just took that streetcar
by chance; but you have to start somewhere, right?
Except that number 7 goes from one end of Prague to the
other, from Brevnov by way of Mala Strana and Nove
Mesto to Zizkov; so there wasn’t much we could do with
that. Then there was that receipt. With that, at least we
knew that some time or other she’d bought something from
that china shop for fifty-five crowns. So we went to the
shop.”
“And they remembered her there,” Minka burst out.
“Dead wrong, miss,” muttered Officer Soucek. “They
didn’t remember her at all. But Dr. Mejzlik, he’s our captain,
he went there himself and asked what you could buy for
fifty-five crowns. ‘All kinds of things,’ they told him, ‘depending
on how many things you buy; but for an even fiftyfive
crowns, there’s only this English teapot, just big enough
for one person.’ — ‘I’ll take one, then,’ our Dr. Mejzlik says,
‘but sell it to me wholesale.’
“So then the captain calls me in and says, ‘Look,
Soucek, here’s a job for you. Let’s assume the girl was a
housemaid. Girls like that are always breaking things, but
when it happens the third time the mistress of the house tells
her, you clumsy goose, this time you pay for it out of your
own money. So the girl goes and buys only one item, to
replace whatever it is she broke. And the only item at fifty146
five crowns is this teapot.’ ‘That’s pretty damned expensive,’
I says to him. And he says, ‘That’s the whole point. First of
all, it tells us why that housemaid kept the receipt: that was
a ton of money for her, and maybe she figured that someday
the mistress would pay her back. In the second place, look:
this is a teapot for one person only. So either the girl
worked for one person only, or else her mistress had a single
person for a roomer and the girl was the one who served
that person breakfast. And this single person was probably a
woman, because a single man would hardly buy himself a
nice, expensive teapot like this one; men hardly even notice
what they’re drinking out of, right? So most likely it was a
single woman; because a spinster like that, who’s renting a
room, always likes something nice that’s all her own, and so
she buys herself just this sort of extravagant, high-priced
thing.’”
“It’s true,” exclaimed Minka. “You know, Pepa, like
that nice little flower vase I have!”
“There you are,” said Officer Soucek. “But you don’t
have the receipt. Anyway, then the captain says, ‘Now,
Soucek, let’s suppose something else; it’s weak as water, but
we have to start somewhere. Look, a person who throws
away fifty-five crowns on a teapot isn’t going to live in
Zizkov. (Dr. Mejzlik was thinking about that number 7 line
again, that streetcar ticket, you know.) There aren’t many
roomers in central Prague, and people who live in Mala
Strana only drink coffee. I’d guess it would probably be that
area where number 7 travels between Hradcany and Dejvice.
I’d almost say,’ he says, ‘that a lady who drinks tea from an
English teapot like this one could live nowhere but in a little
house with a garden. You know the fad these days for
anything English, Soucek.’ — You have to understand that
sometimes our Dr. Mejzlik gets these wild ideas. ‘So what I
want you to do, Soucek,’ he says, ‘is take that teapot, go to
the part of town where that better class of ladies sublets
rooms, and ask questions. And if somebody actually has a
147
teapot just like this one, then find out if a housemaid didn’t
quit work there some time in May. It’s a damned feeble clue,
but we have to give it a shot. So off you go, Soucek, it’s
your case now.’
“Listen, I don’t like all this guesswork. A real detective’s
not some kind of stargazer or fortuneteller. A detective
doesn’t go in for speculating much; oh, it’s true, sometimes
you come across the right thing by chance, but chance, that’s
not what I call honest detective work. That streetcar ticket
and that teapot, now, at least that’s something you can see
and get your hands on. But the rest of it’s only . . . a figment
of the imagination,” said Officer Soucek, a bit sheepish
at having used such an erudite phrase. “So I set about doing
it in my own way. I went from house to house in that part
of town and asked if they didn’t have a teapot like that one
around somewhere. And would you believe it, at the fortyseventh
house I came to, going right down the line, the
housemaid says, ‘Oh sure, that’s the same kind of teapot this
lady who rooms here with the missus has!’ So I waited while
she went to get the lady of the house. She was a general’s
widow, see, and she rented out rooms to two ladies. And
one of the ladies, a Miss Jakoubkova, she was a teacher of
English and she had just that kind of teapot for her tea.
‘Ma’am,’ I says, ‘didn’t you have a maid who left here some
time in May?’ ‘That’s right,’ says the landlady, ‘we called her
Marka, but what her other name was, I don’t remember.’
‘And some time before that, didn’t this girl break a teapot?’
‘She did,’ says the landlady, ‘and she had to buy a new one
out of her own pocket. But my goodness, how did you know
about that?’ ‘Well, ma’am,’ says I, ‘we hear just about
everything.’
“So after that it was easy; first of all I found out who
the housemaid was that this Marka was best friends with —
housemaids always have a girlfriend, just one, but she tells
her everything — and from her I found out that the girl’s
name was Marka Parizkova and she came from Drevic. But
148
most of all I wanted to know who the young man was this
Marka went out with. The friend said she thought it was
somebody named Franta. Who this Franta was, she didn’t
know, but she remembered that she went with the two of
them to the Eden Dance Hall once, and that some young
Casanova there had called out to this Franta, ‘Hey, Ferda!’
Well, then we referred the case to Officer Fryba in our
division; he’s the expert on these aliases, you know. And
right away Fryba says, ‘Franta alias Ferda, that would be
this fellow from Kosire who calls himself Kroutil, but his
real name is Pastyrik. Captain, sir, I’ll go get him, but there
needs to be two of us to do it.’ So I went with him myself,
although that’s not really my line of work. We collared this
Pastyrik at his girlfriend’s; it was pretty nasty, he wanted to
shoot it out. Then Captain Maticka went to work on him
back at the station. Nobody knows how he does it, but in
sixteen hours’ time he got everything out of Pastyrik, how he
did in this Marka Parizkova in the cornfield right after she
got off work and then robbed her of a few crowns. Of
course he’d promised to marry her — they all do that,”
Officer Soucek added gloomily.
Minka shuddered. “Pepa,” she breathed, “that’s awful!”
“Not now it isn’t,” Officer Soucek said solemnly.
“What was awful was when we were standing there by her
body in that field and all we could find was that receipt and
that streetcar ticket. Two tiny, good-for-nothing bits of paper
— but all the same, we evened the score for poor Marka.
Like I told you, never throw nothing away, nothing. Even
the least little thing can turn out to be a clue or evidence.
No sir, you never know what’s in your pocket that might be
important.”
Minka sat perfectly still, her eyes filled with tears. And
suddenly, with a warm burst of affection, she turned to her
Pepa and from her moist hand let fall to the ground the
crumpled receipt which, the entire time, she had been nervously
pressing between her fingers. Pepa didn’t see it,
149
because he was gazing up at the stars. But Officer Soucek
saw it and, sadly and knowingly, he smiled.
150
Oplatka’s End
Toward three o’clock in the morning, plainclothes officer
Krejcik noticed that the shutters of a bakery at No. 17
Neklanova Street were half raised. Accordingly, he rang the
bell and, although he was off duty, peered under the shutters
to see if there was anyone inside. At that moment a man
burst out of the bakery, fired a bullet into Krejcik’s belly
from half a step away, and made his escape.
Officer Bartos, who at the time was patrolling his
assigned beat on Jeronymova Street, heard the shot and
started running in that direction. At the corner of Neklanova
Street he very nearly collided with the fleeing man, but
before he could shout “Halt!” a shot burst out and Officer
Bartos fell to the ground, wounded in the belly.
The street was awakened by the screech of police
whistles; patrolmen from the entire area converged; three
men from the police station arrived on the double, buttoning
their jackets as they ran; within a few minutes a motorcycle
from precinct headquarters roared up and the captain
jumped off. By then Bartos was already dead and Krejcik,
clutching at his belly, was dying.
By morning some twenty arrests had been made; this
was done at random, because nobody had seen the murderer.
On the one hand, the police had to find a way to avenge the
deaths of two of their men. And on the other hand, this is
ordinarily what happens, the assumption being that, by some
divine stroke of luck, one of the suspects will break down
and confess. At headquarters, interrogations were carried out
non-stop, day and night. Pale and harried criminals, well
known to the police, writhed on the rack of endless ques151
tioning; but they shook even more at the thought of what
would happen when a couple of policemen took them in
hand after the questioning ended, for the city’s entire police
force was seething with a dark and fearsome rage. The
murder of Officer Bartos had violated that familiar, unofficial
relationship which exists between the professional
policeman and the professional criminal. If he had simply
been shot, so be it — but you don’t even shoot dumb
animals in the belly.
By the next night, toward the early hours of the morning,
every policeman even on the farthest outskirts of the
city knew that Oplatka had done it. One of the suspects had
squealed: “Sure,” Valta said, “Oplatka done those two on
Neklanova Street, and he’ll knock off a few more; he don’t
care, he’s got TB.” All right then, it’s Oplatka.
That same night, first Valta was arrested and then
Oplatka’s girlfriend and three men from Oplatka’s gang; but
not one of them could or would say where Oplatka was
hiding out. How many uniformed officers and plainclothesmen
were sent to track Oplatka down is another matter. But
in addition to these, every policeman, as soon as he had
gone off duty, quickly swilled some coffee at home, muttered
something to his wife, pulled himself together, and started
off on his own to look for Oplatka. Oh yes, everybody knew
Oplatka, that green-face little runt with the skinny neck.
Towards eleven o’clock at night, Officer Vrzal, who had
completed his rounds at nine, hastily changed into street
clothes and told his wife that he was just going to have a
look around the area. He came across a small, slight man
near the Rajska Garden who seemed to be keeping well in
the shadows. Officer Vrzal, though unarmed and off duty,
moved in a little closer to see; but when he was within three
yards of him, the man thrust his hand in his pocket, shot
Vrzal in the belly, and fled. Officer Vrzal clutched at his
belly and tried to run after him. After a hundred yards he
collapsed, but the police whistles had already started shrill152
ing and several men were chasing after the fleeing shadow.
Behind Rieger Park a few shots were heard. A quarter of an
hour later several cars, draped with policemen, were racing
towards upper Zizkov, and patrols consisting of four or five
men prowled through the new construction sites in that
quarter. Towards one o’clock, a pistol-shot was heard behind
Olsansky Pond; someone on the run had fired at a youth
returning from his girlfriend’s house, but had missed him. At
two o’clock, a posse of uniformed and plainclothesmen
surrounded the abandoned Zidovske kilns and, step by step,
moved in closer. A cold rain began to fall. Toward morning
it was reported that, just beyond the distant suburb of
Malesice, someone had fired at a toll-keeper who had left
his booth. The toll-keeper had started to run after him but
wisely decided that it was none of his business. It was clear
that Oplatka had slipped away into the countryside.
Some sixty policemen returned from the abandoned
kilns, soaked to the skin and so enraged with helplessness
that they could have wept. God in heaven, it was infuriating!
The bastard had shot down three of the city’s policemen
— Bartos, Krejcik, and Vrzal — and now he was running
loose in the territory of the regional police! We have first
rights, the city’s uniformed and plainclothes officers maintained,
and now we have to share this runt, this stinking
Oplatka, with them! Listen, we’re the ones he shot at, so it’s
our affair, right? We don’t want the regionals butting in; all
we need them to do is block his way so he has to go back
to Prague.
Throughout the day a cold rain fell. That evening,
towards twilight, Regional Officer Mrazek was on his way
to Pysely from Cercany, where he had gone to buy a battery
for his radio. He was unarmed and whistling to himself. As
he was going along, he saw a smallish man in front of him.
There was nothing out of the ordinary about this, but the
small man stopped, as if uncertain which way to go. Now
who might that be, Mrazek asked himself, and at that same
153
moment he saw a flash and toppled over, clutching his hand
to his side.
That same evening, needless to say, regional police
throughout the area were put on the alert. “Listen, Mrazek,”
Captain Honzatko said to the dying man, “I don’t want you
worrying about this. Word of honor, we’ll get our hands on
the son of a bitch. It’s that Oplatka, and I’m betting he’ll try
to make it to Sobeslav — that’s where he was born. God
knows why these bastards head for home when their
number’s up. Give me your hand, Vaclav; I swear to you
we’ll find that man and finish him off, no matter what.”
Vaclav Mrazek made an effort to smile — he had been
thinking of his three children, but now he was imagining
that he saw regional police officers gathering around him on
all sides . . . he thought maybe Toman from Cerny Kostel
was among them . . . surely Zavada from Votice was there .
. . Rousek from Sazava, too; his buddies, his buddies . . .
What a beautiful sight, thought Vaclav Mrazek, all of us
together! Then Mrazek smiled for the last time; after that
there was nothing but inhuman agony.
That night it happened that Regional Sergeant Zavada
from Votice decided to search the night train from Benesov.
Who knows, maybe Oplatka’s in there somewhere; would he
risk taking a train? Lights flickered in the cars; passsengers
dozed on the seats, hunched together like weary animals.
Sergeant Zavada went from car to car, thinking, how the
hell do I recognize a man I’ve never seen? At that instant, a
yard away from him, a young man with a hat over his eyes
jumped up, there was a loud report, and before the sergeant
could unhitch his rifle from his shoulder the man had left
the passenger car, brandishing a revolver. Sergeant Zavada
only had time to shout “Stop him!” before he collapsed, face
down, in the aisle.
Meanwhile, the young man had jumped from the train
and was running toward the freight cars. A railwayman,
Hrusa, was strolling beside the freight cars with a lantern
154
and promising himself, well, as soon as No. 26 pulls out I’ll
go lie down for a while in the shed. At that same moment a
man ran into him. In nothing flat, old Hrusa had blocked
his path; it was pure masculine instinct. Then he saw some
sort of flash, and that was all; even before No. 26 had left
the station, old Hrusa was lying in the shed, but on a plank,
and the railwaymen were making their way inside to take a
look at him, their heads bared.
A few men ran panting after the fleeing shadow, but it
was already too late. By this time, undoubtedly, he had
crossed the tracks and entered the fields. And at that moment,
throughout the countryside enfolded in autumn slumber,
a frenzied panic began to spread out in an ever-widening
circle from the railway station with its twinkling lights and
its cluster of frightened people. People crowded into their
cottages, scarcely daring to set foot beyond the door. It was
rumored that, in such-and-such a place or other, someone
had seen a wild-looking stranger; he was either a tall, thin
man or else a short man in a leather coat. A postman had
seen someone hiding behind a tree. Someone on the main
road had signaled a coachman named Lebeda to stop, but
Lebeda had lashed at his horses and driven off. It was a fact
that someone sobbing with fatigue had stopped a child on
her way to school and snatched her little bag with a piece of
bread in it. “Give me that,” the man had snarled, and he
ran off with the bread. At that point the villagers bolted
their doors, holding their breath in terror. At most they
dared press their noses against the windowpane, looking out
with suspicion on the gray and empty countryside.
At the same time another, related event was taking
place. One after the other, from every direction, regional
police officers began to assemble; who knows where they all
came from. “My God, man,” shouted Captain Honzatko at
an officer from Caslav, “what are you doing here? Who sent
you? Do you think I need cops from all over Bohemia to
catch one thug? Do you?” The officer from Caslav shed his
155
helmet and scratched the nape of his neck in confusion.
“Well, you see, sir,” he said with a beseeching glance,
“Zavada was my buddy . . . and if I wasn’t in on this —
well, I couldn’t do that to him!” “Damn it,” thundered the
captain, “that’s what every one of them’s telling me! Close
to fifty officers have already showed up here without orders
— what am I supposed to do with you?” Captain Honzatko
gnawed his moustache savagely. “All right, take the stretch
of highway from the crossroads up to the woods. Tell
Voldrich from Benesov that you’re relieving him.” “That
won’t work, sir,” the officer from Caslav replied sensibly,
“what I mean, sir, is Voldrich, he’d never stand for it, and
that’s a fact. It’d be better if I was to take the woods from
the edge up to that secondary road — who’s on duty there?”
“Semerad from Veselka,” the captain growled; “now listen
and remember: on my authority, if you see anyone, you’re to
shoot without warning. No cold feet, understand me? I’m
not letting my men get shot. Now march!”
Then the stationmaster arrived. “Well, Captain,” he
said, “thirty more turned up.” “Thirty what?” Captain
Honzatko sputtered. “Why,” said the stationmaster,
“railwaymen, of course. You know, on account of Hrusa. He
was one of our men, so they’ve come to offer a hand — ”
“Send them back,” the captain shouted, “I don’t need any
civilians here.” The stationmaster shifted uneasily from one
foot to the other. “Look, Captain,” he offered soothingly,
“they’ve come here all the way from Prague and Mezimosti.
It’s a good thing when they stick together like that. You see,
they won’t take no for an answer now that Oplatka’s killed
one of their own. They’ve got a right to it, in a way. So if I
were you, Captain, I’d do them a favor and take them on.”
The captain, his temper rising, growled that he wished to
hell they’d just leave him alone.
In the course of the day, the wide circle gradually
tightened. That afternoon the commander from the nearest
garrison headquarters telephoned to see if reinforcements
156
were needed from the military. “No,” Captain Honzatko
snapped disrespectfully, “this is our affair, understand?”
Meanwhile, some city police officers had arrived by train
from Prague; they argued fiercely with the regional sergeant,
who was going to send them straight back again. “What?”
raged Inspector Holub in a fury, “you want to send us back?
He’s killed three of our people and only two of your fairhaired
boys! We’ve got more right to him than you do, you
tin-star wonders!” No sooner had this conflict been settled
than a fresh one broke out on the far side of the circle
among the regional police and the gamekeepers from the
forest. “Get out of here,” the officers fumed, “this isn’t a
rabbit hunt!” “The hell with you,” replied the gamekeepers,
“these are our woods and we have a right to be here any
time we damn well please. Understand?” “Use your heads,
folks,” said Rousek from Sazava, trying to get things
straightened out, “this is our business and nobody else’s
barging in on us.” “That’s what you say,” the gamekeepers
retorted. “That kid the man took the bread from is our man
Hurka’s kid. There’s no way we’re letting that pass, so forget
it!”
That evening the circle was closed. When darkness had
fallen, each man heard the hoarse breathing of the man on
his right and the man on his left, and the squelch of footsteps
in the viscous earth. “Stay put” were the words that
sped quietly from man to man. “Don’t move!” The silence
was heavy and harrowing; now and then dry leaves rustled
in the darkness of the circle’s center or a drizzle of light rain
hissed; now and then a man’s footstep squelched in passing
or something metallic clinked, perhaps a rifle or a strap.
Toward midnight, someone in the darkness cried “Halt!”
and fired a shot. At that same moment things somehow
became oddly confused, the scattered reports of some thirty
rifle-shots rang out, and everyone began to run in that
direction. Suddenly another shout was heard: “Get back!
Nobody move!” They fell back into some sort of order and
157
once again the circle was closed; but only now did they all
fully realize that in the darkness before them a lost, spent
man was trapped in his hiding place, lying in wait for the
chance to strike out in a rabid assault. Something like an
uncontrollable shudder passed quickly from man to man;
from time to time the heavy drip of water plashed like a
furtive step. God, if only we could see! Christ, if only it
were light!
Day began to dawn mistily. Each man discerned the
outline of the man next to him, marveling that he had been
so close to a human being. In the middle of the circle of
men the contours of a dense thicket or copse appeared (it
was a covert for hares), and it was so quiet there, so utterly
quiet — Captain Honzatko tugged feverishly at his moustache:
damn, we’ll have to wait it out, or —
“I’m going in,” murmured Inspector Holub. The captain
snorted. “You’re going in,” he said, turning to the nearest of
his men. Five men rushed into the thicket; a crackle of
broken branches was heard and then, suddenly, silence.
“Stay where you are,” Captain Honzatko shouted to his
men, and he moved slowly toward the trees. Soon there
emerged from the thicket the broad back of a regional
officer dragging something, some sort of huddled body, the
feet of which were being held by a gamekeeper with a bushy
moustache. Behind them Captain Honzatko, scowling and
sallow, squeezed his way out of the thicket. “Put him down
right here,” he gasped, wiping his forehead; he looked
around as if surprised at the hesitant circle of men, scowled
still more, and shouted, “What are you gawking at? Dismissed!”
In some confusion, man after man straggled forward to
the diminutive, bowed body on the ground. So this was
Oplatka: the gaunt arm sticking out of the sleeve, the small,
greenish, rain-smeared face on the thin neck — God, what a
pitiful runt, this wretch Oplatka! Look, he took a bullet in
the back, and here’s a little hole in back of his jug-ear, and
158
here, too . . . Four, five, seven shots got him! Captain
Honzatko, who was kneeling by the body, stood up and
cleared his throat dispiritedly. Then, uneasily and almost
shyly, he raised his eyes — There stood a long, solid line of
regional officers, rifles on shoulders, bayonets shining above.
God, what sturdy men, like tanks, and arrayed in a row as
if on full-dress parade, no one saying a word. — On the
other side a black cluster of city police officers, hefty men
one and all, pockets bulging with revolvers; then the blueuniformed
railwaymen, short and stubborn; then the gamekeepers
in green, lanky fellows, sinewy and bearded, their
faces red as peppers. — Why, it’s like a public funeral,
thought the startled captain; they’ve formed a square, as if
they were going to fire a salute! Captain Honzatko gnawed
at his lip in senseless and stinging torment. — That runt on
the ground, rumpled and stiff, a sick crow riddled with
bullets, and there, all those hunters — “Damn it all,”
shouted the captain, gritting his teeth, “isn’t there a sack or
something here? Cover that body!”
Some two hundred men began to disperse in various
directions. They did not speak to each other except to
grumble about the bad roads and mutter sullenly in reply to
excited questions, “Sure, he’s dead, he’s good and dead, now
leave us alone!” The regional officer who stayed on guard
over the covered body snapped angrily at the rural onlookers:
“What are you hanging around for? There’s nothing
here to gawk at! It’s no business of yours!”
At the regional boundary, Officer Rousek from Sazava
spat out, “Dirty killers! It makes me sick. God, I just wish I
could’ve had at that Oplatka on my own, man to man!”
159
The Last Judgment
Pursued by several warrants and a whole army of policemen
and detectives, the notorious multiple- killer Kugler swore
that they’d never take him, and they didn’t — at least not
alive. The last of his nine murderous deeds was shooting a
policeman who was trying to arrest him. The policeman
indeed died, but not before putting a total of seven bullets
into Kugler, three of which were definitely fatal. To all
appearances he had escaped earthly justice.
Kugler’s death came so quickly that he had no time to
feel any particular pain. When his soul left his body, it might
have been surprised at the oddness of the next world, a
world beyond space, gray and infinitely desolate — but it
wasn’t. A man who has been jailed on two continents looks
upon the next life merely as new surroundings. Kugler
expected to charge on through, equipped with a bit of
courage, just as he’d done everywhere else.
At length the inevitable Last Judgment got around to
Kugler. Heaven being eternally in a state of emergency, he
was brought before a special court of three judges and not,
as his previous conduct would ordinarily merit, before a
jury. The courtroom was furnished simply, like courtrooms
on earth, with one exception: there was no provision for
swearing in witnesses. The judges were old and worthy
councilors with austere, weary faces. The formalities were
somewhat tedious: Kugler, Ferdinand; unemployed; born on
such-and-such a date; died . . . At this point it was shown
that Kugler did not know the date of his own death. Immediately
he realized that his failure to remember was damaging
in the eyes of the judges, and his attitude hardened.
160
“Of what do you consider yourself guilty?” the presiding
judge asked.
“Nothing,” Kugler replied obstinately.
“Bring in the witness,” the judge sighed.
In front of Kugler there appeared an extraordinary
gentleman, stately, bearded, and clothed in a blue robe
strewn with golden stars; at his entrance the judges rose, and
even Kugler stood up, reluctant but fascinated. Only when
the old gentleman took a seat did the judges sit down again.
“Witness,” began the presiding judge, “Omniscient God,
this court has summoned You in order to hear Your testimony
in the matter of Kugler, Ferdinand. As You are the
Supreme Truth, You need not take the oath. We ask only
that, in the interest of the proceedings, You keep to the
subject at hand and not branch out into particulars that
have no legal bearing on the case. And you, Kugler, don’t
interrupt the Witness. He knows everything, so there’s no
use denying anything. And now, Witness, if You would
please begin.”
That said, the presiding judge took off his spectacles
and leaned comfortably on the bench before him, evidently
in preparation for a long speech by the witness. The oldest
of the three judges nestled down in sleep. The recording
angel opened the Book of Life.
The Witness, God, cleared his throat and began:
“Yes, Kugler, Ferdinand. Ferdinand Kugler, son of a
factory official, was a bad, unmanageable child from his
earliest days. He loved his mother dearly but was ashamed
to show it; that’s why he was unruly and defiant. Young
man, you infuriated everyone! Do you remember how you
bit your father on the thumb when he tried to spank you
because you’d stolen a rose from the notary’s garden?”
“That rose was for Irma, the tax collector’s daughter,”
Kugler recalled.
“I know,” said God. “Irma was seven years old then.
And do you know what happened to her later?”
161
“No, I don’t.”
“She got married; she married Oskar, the son of the
factory owner. But she contracted a venereal disease from
him and died of a miscarriage. You remember Rudy
Zaruba?”
“What happened to him?”
“Why, he joined the navy and died in Bombay. You two
were the worst boys in the whole town. Kugler, Ferdinand
was a thief before his tenth year and an inveterate liar. He
kept bad company, the drunken beggar Dlabola, for instance,
with whom he shared his food.”
The presiding judge motioned with his hand, as if
perhaps this was unnecessary information; but Kugler himself
asked shyly, “And . . . what happened to his daughter?”
“Marka?” said God. “She lowered herself considerably.
In her fourteenth year she prostituted herself; in her twentieth
year she died, remembering you in the agony of her
death. By your fourteenth year you were nearly a drunkard
yourself, and you often ran away from home. Your father
died from grief and worry, and your mother nearly cried her
eyes out. You brought dishonor on your home, and your
little sister, your pretty sister Marticka, never married: no
young man would come calling at the home of a thief. She’s
still living alone and in poverty, exhausted from sewing each
night and humiliated by her scant earnings from people who
take pity on her.”
“What’s happening right now?”
“This very minute she is at Vlcak’s, buying thread. Do
you remember that shop? Once, when you were six years
old, you bought a colored glass marble there; and that very
same day you lost it and never ever found it. Do you remember
how sad and angry you were then, and how you
blubbered?”
“Where did it roll away to?” Kugler asked eagerly.
“Down the drain and into the gutter. As a matter of
fact, it’s still there, after thirty years. Right now it’s raining
162
on earth, and your marble is shivering in a gush of cold
water.”
Kugler bent his head, overcome. But the presiding judge
fitted his spectacles back on his nose and said mildly, “Witness,
we are obliged to get on with the case. Has the accused
committed murder?”
The Witness nodded his head. “He murdered nine
people. The first one he killed in a brawl, and while in
prison for it he was completely corrupted. The second was
an unfaithful sweetheart. For that he was sentenced to death,
but he escaped. The third was an old man, whom he robbed.
The fourth was a night watchman.”
“Then he died?” Kugler shouted.
“He died after three days of terrible pain,” God said,
“and he left six children behind. The fifth and sixth people
were an old married couple; he finished them off with an
axe and found practically no money, although they had more
than twenty thousand hidden away.”
Kugler jumped up: “Where? Tell me!”
“In the straw mattress,” God said. “In a linen sack
inside the mattress. That’s where they stored the money they
got from usury and penny-pinching. The seventh man he
killed in America; he was an immigrant, a countryman,
helpless as a child.”
“So it was in the mattress,” Kugler whispered in amazement.
“Yes,” the Witness continued. “The eighth man was a
passerby who happened to be in the way when Kugler was
trying to outrun the police. Kugler had periostitis then and
was delirious from the pain. Young man, you were suffering
terribly. The last was the policeman who killed Kugler,
whom Kugler felled just as he himself was dying.”
“And why did the accused commit murder?” queried
the presiding judge.
“For the same reasons others do,” answered God.
“From anger, from greed, deliberately and by chance, some163
times with pleasure and other times from necessity. He was
generous and sometimes he helped people. He was kind to
women, he loved animals, and he kept his word. Should I
tell about his good deeds?”
“Thank You,” the presiding judge said, “it isn’t necessary.
Does the accused have anything to say in his defense?”
“No,” Kugler replied with honest indifference; it was all
the same to him.
“The court will now take this case under advisement,”
the presiding judge declared, and the councilors withdrew.
God and Kugler remained in the courtroom.
“Who are they?” Kugler asked, inclining his head
toward the three who were leaving.
“People like you,” said God. “They were judges on
earth, so they’re judges here as well.”
Kugler nibbled at his fingertips. “I thought . . . I mean,
I didn’t worry about it or anything, but . . . I figured that
You would judge, since . . . since . . . ”
“Since I’m God,” finished the stately gentleman. “But
that’s just it, don’t you see? Because I know everything, I
can’t possibly judge. That wouldn’t do at all. By the way, do
you know who turned you in this time?”
“No, I don’t,” said Kugler, surprised.
“Lucka, the waitress. She did it out of jealousy.”
“Excuse me,” Kugler ventured, feeling bolder, “but You
forgot to mention that no-good Teddy I shot in Chicago.”
“You’re wrong there,” God objected. “He recovered and
is alive this very minute. I know he’s an informer, but
otherwise he’s a good man and truly fond of children. You
shouldn’t think of anyone as being completely worthless.”
“But really, why don’t You . . . why don’t You Yourself
do the judging?” Kugler asked pensively.
“Because I know everything. If judges knew everything,
absolutely everything, they couldn’t judge, either: they would
understand everything, and their hearts would ache. How
could I possibly judge you? Judges know only about your
164
crimes; but I know everything about you. Everything, Kugler.
And that’s why I cannot judge you.”
“But why are those same people judges . . . even here in
heaven?”
“Because people belong to each other. As you see, I’m
only a witness; it’s people who determine the verdict — even
in heaven. Believe me, Kugler, this is the way it should be.
The only justice people deserve is human justice.”
At that moment, the judges returned from their deliberations.
In stern tones the presiding judge announced: “For
repeated crimes of first-degree murder, manslaughter, robbery,
illegal re-entry, concealment of weapons, and the theft
of a rose, Kugler, Ferdinand is sentenced to lifelong punishment
in hell. The sentence begins immediately. Next case,
please. Is the accused, Machat, Frantisek present in court?”
165
The Crime on the Farm
“Arise, defendant,” the presiding judge said. “You are
charged with the murder of your father-in-law, Frantisek
Lebeda. During the preliminary questioning, you confessed
to having struck him three times on the head with an axe,
with intent to kill. Tell me: do you feel yourself to be guilty
of this crime?”
The small, work-worn man trembled and swallowed
something. “No,” he managed to get out.
“You killed him?”
“Sure.”
“Then do you feel yourself guilty?”
“No.”
The presiding judge had the patience of an angel. “Look
here, Vondracek,” he said, “we’ve learned that on an earlier
occasion you tried to poison him. You put rat poison in his
coffee. Isn’t that true?”
“Sure.”
“From this it would appear that you tried to take his
life once before. Do you understand me?”
The little man sniffled and shrugged his shoulders in
bewilderment. “It was on account of that clover,” he stammered.
“He sold that clover, and I kept telling him, Dad,
leave that clover alone, I’ll buy me some rabbits — ”
“Wait,” the judge interrupted. “Was it his clover or
yours?”
“Well, his,” the defendant mumbled. “But what did he
need clover for? So I kept telling him, Dad, at least let me
have the field with the alfalfa, but he said to me, when I die
Marka gets it — that’s my wife — and then you can do
166
what you want with it, you greedy grabber.”
“And that’s why you wanted to poison him?”
“Well, yes — ”
“Because he insulted you?”
“No. It was on account of that field. He said he was
selling that field.”
“But, man,” the judge burst out, “it was his field,
wasn’t it? Why shouldn’t he sell it?”
The defendant Vondracek looked reproachfully at the
judge. “Well, sure, but next to that field I have this strip of
potatoes,” he tried to explain. “That’s why I bought it, to
put that field together with this other one, and he said,
what’s it to me, that potato patch, I’m selling to Joudal.”
“So you were constantly quarreling,” the judge
prompted.
“Well, sure, sort of,” said Vondracek, frowning. “It was
on account of that goat.”
“What goat?”
“He milked my goat dry. I kept telling him, Dad, leave
that goat alone or else give us the little pasture near the
creek. But he leased out the pasture.”
“And what did he do with the money?” asked one of
the jurors.
“Just what he would do,” the defendant said glumly.
“He hid it in a strongbox. When I die, he said, you get it.
But him, he didn’t want to die. Even if he was already over
seventy.”
“Then you’re saying that in these quarrels your fatherin-
law was at fault?”
“He was,” Vondracek stated hesitantly. “He didn’t want
to give anything up. As long as I’m alive, he said, I run this
farm and that’s that. And I kept telling him, please, Dad, if
you buy a cow I’ll plow that field and then you won’t have
to sell it. But he said, after I die you can buy two cows for
all I care, but I’m selling that field to Joudal.”
“Listen, Vondracek,” the judge said sternly, “didn’t you
167
kill him because of the money in the strongbox?”
“That money was for a cow,” Vondracek replied stubbornly.
“We figured that when he died we’d get a cow. A
little farm like that needs a cow. How else can I get cow
dung?”
“Defendant,” the public prosecutor interrupted, “we’re
not talking about cows, but about a human life. Why did
you kill your father-in-law?”
“It was on account of that field.”
“That’s no kind of answer!”
“He wanted to sell that field.”
“But the money would have been yours anyway, after
he died!”
“Sure, but he didn’t want to die,” said Vondracek,
offended. “Your Honor, if he’d just gone ahead and died —
I never did anything bad to him, anybody around here’d tell
you that. I treated him like my own father, isn’t that so?” he
said, turning around to the spectators. The auditorium,
where half the village sat, rustled in assent.
“Yes,” the judge replied gravely, over the noise, “and
that’s why you wanted to poison him, is that it?”
“Poison,” the defendant muttered. “He didn’t have to
sell that clover. Your Honor, sir, anybody around here’d
swear to it. You got to have clover or it’s no farm at all,
isn’t that so?”
The audience murmured its agreement.
“Turn around and face me, defendant,” the judge
shouted, “or I’ll clear the court. Now tell us how the murder
came about.”
“Well,” Vondracek began hesitantly, “one Sunday I saw
he was talking to Joudal again. Dad, I said to him, you can’t
sell that field out from under me. But he said, why should I
ask you, you brickmaker? So I said to myself, that does it.
Then I went out to chop wood.”
“Is this the axe you used?”
“Sure.”
168
“Continue.”
“That night I said to the wife, go take the kids to your
aunt’s. Right off she starts crying. Turn it off, I tell her, I’m
going to talk to him first. So then he comes out to the
woodshed and says, that’s my axe, hand it over! And I tell
him, you milked my goat dry. Then he tries to grab the axe
from me. So I hit him with it.”
“Why?”
“On account of that field.”
“And why did you hit him three times?”
Vondracek shrugged his shoulders. “Well, because —
Your Honor, everybody around here’s used to hard work.”
“And then?”
“Then I went to bed.”
“Did you sleep?”
“No. I figured up how much a cow would cost and
how I’d trade that pasture for that corner field by the road.
Then those fields’d be together, see.”
“And your conscience didn’t bother you?”
“No. What bothered me was, those fields wasn’t together.
And then I’d have to fix up a shed for the cow, that
would cost a couple hundred. Why, my father-in-law, he
didn’t even have a wagon. I kept telling him, Dad, God
forgive you for your sins, but this is no way to run a farm.
Those two fields just belong together, they want it, you can
just feel it.”
“And didn’t you feel anything for the old man?” the
judge thundered.
“But he wanted to sell that field to Joudal,” the defendant
stammered.
“And so you murdered him out of greed!”
“That’s not true!” Vondracek protested excitedly. “It
was on account of that field! If those fields was together— ”
“Don’t you feel any guilt?”
“No.”
“Murdering an old man means nothing to you?”
169
“Like I told you, it was on account of that field,”
Vondracek burst out, almost sobbing. “That’s not murder!
Jesus, Mary, and Joseph, everybody knows that! Why, Your
Honor, sir, it was all in our family! I’d never do that to a
stranger — I never stole nothing . . . ask anybody about
Vondracek . . . and they picked me up like a thief, like some
kind of thief,” Vondracek moaned, choking in his sorrow.
“No, like a parricide,” the judge said sadly. “Do you
know, Vondracek, that the penalty for this is death?”
Vondracek blew his nose and snuffled. “It was on
account of that field,” he stated in resignation; after which
the trial dragged on: witnesses, statements by the prosecution
and the defense . . .
While the jury was out deliberating the guilt of the defendant
Vondracek, the presiding judge stared out the window,
lost in thought.
“On the whole, it was pretty weak,” another of the
judges muttered. “The prosecution never really pressed, nor
did the defense have much to say . . . in short, a straightforward
case any way you look at it.”
The presiding judge snorted. “A straightforward case,”
he said, dismissing the idea with a wave of his hand. “Listen,
my friend, that man feels as much in the right as you or
I. It’s as if I were judging a butcher for slaughtering a cow,
or a mole for making molehills. At times I felt this wasn’t
our affair at all, if you understand me; not a question of law
or of justice — Ahh,” he paused to breathe and take off his
robe. “I have to get away from this for a while. You know, I
think the jury will acquit him. It’s absurd, but I think they
will acquit him because . . . I’ll tell you something: I’ve got
farming blood in me, and when that man said those fields
just belonged together, well . . . suddenly I saw those fields,
and I felt as if we ought to judge . . . in accordance with
some sort of divine law, do you understand me? That we
170
ought to judge those two fields. Do you know what I would
rather have done? I would rather have stood up, put aside
my robe, and said, ‘Defendant Vondracek, in the name of
God, because bloodshed cries out to heaven, sow those two
fields with henbane, henbane and thorns. And until the day
of your death you will have this fallow of hatred before
your eyes . . . ‘ I’d like to know what the public prosecutor
would say to that. There are times, my friend, when God
alone should judge. You know, He would impose such great
and terrible punishments — To judge in the name of God;
but we’re not equal to that. — What, has the jury reached a
verdict already?” With a sigh of reluctance, the presiding
judge put on his robe. “Well then, let’s get on with it.
Summon the jury!”
171
The Disappearance of an Actor
It was on September second that Jan Benda, the actor,
disappeared — the Great Benda, as he had been known from
the time when, at a single leap, he had soared to one of the
highest rungs on the ladder of theatrical fame. In point of
fact, nothing whatsoever happened on September second.
The cleaning woman, who entered Benda’s apartment at nine
o’clock in the morning, found the bed rumpled and everything
in the piggish disarray that normally characterized
Benda’s surroundings; but the great man himself was not at
home. Inasmuch as there was nothing unusual about this,
she cleaned and straightened the apartment in her slapdash
fashion and went on her way again. So be it. But from that
time on, not a trace of Benda was to be found.
Mrs. Maresova (that is, the cleaning woman) wasn’t
overly surprised at this state of affairs, either. These actors,
if you please, are just like gypsies; who knows if he’s off
acting somewhere or off on a spree. But on September tenth
a call went out for Benda; he was supposed to have been at
the theater, where they were beginning to rehearse King
Lear. When Benda still hadn’t shown up by the third rehearsal,
they became extremely upset and telephoned Benda’s
friend Dr. Goldberg, to see if he knew what had become of
Benda.
This Dr. Goldberg was a surgeon and earned an atrocious
amount of money from appendectomies; it’s become
sort of a Jewish specialty. In addition to that, he was a stout
man with stout gold spectacles and a stout heart of gold; he
had a passion for art, and his apartment was crammed with
paintings from floor to ceiling; and he was devoted to
172
Benda, who treated him with friendly contempt and, somewhat
indulgently, always let him pick up the tab — which,
just between us, was no piddling sum. Benda’s tragic countenance
and the beaming face of Dr. Goldberg (who drank
only water) had long been a familiar sight at all those
legendary sprees and wild escapades which constituted the
notorious side of the great thespian’s fame.
So they telephoned this Dr. Goldberg from the theater
to find out what could have happened to Benda. He said
that he had no idea, but that he would go out looking for
him. What he didn’t say was that, for an entire week, he
had already been searching for Benda in all the night clubs
and other pleasure spots with increasing alarm. He had an
uneasy foreboding that something had indeed happened to
Benda. In point of fact, it was like this: Dr. Goldberg was,
so far as he could ascertain, the last person to have seen Jan
Benda. Sometime towards the end of August he had accompanied
Benda on a triumphant round of Prague’s night life;
but subsequently, Benda had failed to show up at any of
their usual meeting places. Perhaps he’s ill, Dr. Goldberg
finally told himself, and one evening he dropped by Benda’s
apartment; it was on September first, to be exact. He rang
the bell; nobody opened the door, but he could hear some
sort of rustling inside. Dr. Goldberg therefore went on
ringing the bell for a good five minutes. Suddenly he heard
footsteps and the door opened. There stood Benda, wrapped
in a dressing gown, and Dr. Goldberg was aghast at the
sight of him, so forbidding did the famed actor appear with
his hair tousled and matted and a full week’s growth of
stubble on his face. He looked haggard and grimy. “So it’s
you,” he said sullenly, “what do you want?”
“Good heavens, what’s the matter with you?” Dr.
Goldberg burst out in astonishment.
“Nothing,” Benda snarled. “I’m not going out anywhere,
if that’s what you want. Leave me alone!” And he’d
shut the door in Goldberg’s face. The day after that, he
173
disappeared.
Now Dr. Goldberg was gazing worriedly through his
thick glasses. There was something wrong here. From the
caretaker of the building where Benda lived, he learned only
that the other night, maybe the night of September first, a
car had stopped in front of the apartment building at about
three in the morning, but nobody got out. All that happened
was that somebody’d honked the horn like he was giving
someone inside the building a signal. Then you could hear
someone leave the building and slam the front door, and
after that the car drove off. As to what kind of car it was,
who knows, the caretaker hadn’t got up to look at it. At
three o’clock in the morning, you don’t get out of bed unless
you have to. But that horn was honking away like those
folks in the car were in one hell of a hurry and hadn’t a
moment to lose.
Mrs. Maresova had claimed earlier that Mr. Benda
hadn’t left his apartment for a whole week (except maybe at
night), hadn’t shaved, and probably hadn’t even washed
either, from the looks of him. He had sent out for food,
swilled brandy, sprawled on the sofa, and that’s about all.
Now that others were beginning to take an interest in
Benda’s disappearance, too, Dr. Goldberg went back again to
Mrs. Maresova.
“My good woman,” he said, “listen, do you happen to
know what kind of clothes Mr. Benda was wearing when he
left his apartment?”
“None,” said Mrs. Maresova, “and that’s what bothers
me. He wasn’t wearing nothing at all. I know all of his
clothes, and they’re all hanging right there in the closet —
right down to the last pair of pants.”
“But surely he wouldn’t have gone out just in his
underwear, would he?” asked Dr. Goldberg, very much
startled.
“Not in his underwear, neither,” declared Mrs.
Maresova, “and not in his shoes. That’s what’s so funny, sir.
174
Look, I got every piece of his laundry all written down here,
because I take it to the cleaner’s. Now it’s all clean and back
again, and I got everything sorted out and counted. He’s got
eighteen shirts and there’s not a one of them missing, not
even a handkerchief, not one single thing. The only thing
that’s gone is this little satchel he always carries with him. If
he did go away, then the dear thing must’ve been wearing
his birthday suit.”
Dr. Goldberg looked very grave. “My good woman,” he
said, “when you entered the apartment on September second,
did you notice any particular disorder? You know,
anything knocked over or any doors broken open?”
“Disorder,” pondered Mrs. Maresova. “I’d have to say
the disorder was pretty much like always. Mr. Benda, you
know, he lived pretty much like a pig. But outside of that,
sir, there wasn’t any disorder, not to speak of, no. But I ask
you, where could he go when he didn’t have a stitch of
clothes on?”
Dr. Goldberg, to be sure, knew as little as she did. And
this time, with the gloomiest of misgivings, he turned to the
police.
“Right,” said the police officer, after Dr. Goldberg had
poured out everything he knew, “we’ll search for him. But
from what you said, about how he shut himself up at home
for a whole week, unshaved and unwashed, sprawling on the
sofa, swilling brandy, and then disappearing naked as an
Ashanti, well, sir, that looks like it could be, hm, like some
kind of — ”
“Delirium,” Dr. Goldberg blurted out.
“Right,” said the officer. “We call it suicide while of
unsound mind. You know, I wouldn’t be surprised if that’s
what he did.”
“But then most likely his body would’ve been found,”
Dr. Goldberg supposed uncertainly. “And besides, how far
175
could he have gone naked? And why would he have taken
his satchel with him? And the car that was waiting in front
of the building — That seems more like running away,
Officer.”
“What about debts?” the officer had another idea.
“Didn’t he have debts?”
“No,” said the doctor quickly. Although Benda was up
to his eyeballs in debts, he never took them seriously.
“Or . . . some kind of personal problem, say . . . an
unhappy love affair or syphilis or some other serious worries?”
“Nothing, so far as I know,” said Dr. Goldberg hesitantly.
One or two things indeed came to mind, but he kept
them to himself — besides, they could hardly have anything
to do with Benda’s inexplicable disappearance. All the same,
on his way home from the police — of course, the police
would do everything in their power — he turned over in his
mind all that he knew about that side of Benda. It wasn’t
much:
1. Benda had a wife living abroad somewhere, whom he
obviously didn’t care for;
2. he was keeping some girl in Holesovice, on the
outskirts of Prague;
3. he was having an affair, a scandalous affair, with a
woman named Greta, the wife of the big industrialist
Korbel. Greta was bound and determined to be an actress,
and for that reason Korbel had financed some movies in
which his wife, of course, played the starring role. It was
well known that Benda was Greta’s lover, and that she
followed him around and no longer bothered with even the
appearance of discretion. For all that, Benda never talked
about these things; he treated them with a contempt that
was one part lofty disdain and one part cynicism, and it
made Goldberg shudder. No, the doctor told himself hopelessly,
nobody knows all the ins and outs of Benda’s private
life. I’d bet my bottom dollar there’s some sort of ugly
176
business behind this, but it’s in the hands of the police now.
Dr. Goldberg didn’t know, of course, what the police were
doing or what lines of investigation they were following; he
waited with growing despondency to receive some kind of
report. Meanwhile an entire month had elapsed since the
actor’s disappearance, and people were beginning to talk
about Jan Benda in the past tense.
One evening Dr. Goldberg happened to run into the old
actor Lebduska. As they chatted away about this and that,
the conversation naturally turned to Benda. “Let me tell you,
there was an actor,” recalled old Lebduska. “I remember
him when he was about twenty-five years old. That damned
kid, he was playing Oswald! Did you know that medical
students used to go watch him to study the symptoms of
paresis? And when he first played King Lear — Listen, I
can’t even tell you how he played that role, because my eyes
were on his hands the whole time. He had hands like an
eighty-year-old man, scrawny, shriveled, pitiful hands — to
this day I can’t figure out how he did those hands. I know a
thing or two about makeup myself, but I’m telling you,
nobody did it like Benda. Only an actor can appreciate it.”
Dr. Goldberg felt a pang of melancholy pleasure on
hearing this fellow actor’s obituary of Jan Benda.
“He was an actor through and through, friend,” sighed
Lebduska. “You wouldn’t believe how he’d browbeat the
wardrobe man! ‘You put that nickel-and-dime lace on my
coat,’ he’d holler, ‘and I’m not playing the king!’ He couldn’t
stand the idea of wearing any of that fake theatrical stuff.
Listen, when he was going to do Othello, he ran around to
all the antique shops till he found this genuine Renaissance
ring; and that’s what he wore on his finger when he played
Othello. He said he did a better job of acting when he had
the real thing on him like that. It wasn’t like playing a role,
it was nothing less than . . . metamorphosis,” said Lebduska
177
hesitantly, not knowing if he’d used the right word. “And
whenever he was in a play, every intermission he’d swear
like a trooper and lock himself in his dressing room so no
one could interrupt his mood. That’s why he drank so much
his nerves were affected,” Lebduska offered reflectively.
“Well, friend,” he added, by way of parting, “I’m off to the
movies.”
“I’ll come with you,” proposed Dr. Goldberg, who had
no particular plans for the evening. The film was some sort
of seafaring adventure, but Dr. Goldberg never really knew
what it was all about. The tears all but spilled from his eyes
as he listened to old Lebduska rambling on about Jan Benda.
“He wasn’t an actor,” Lebduska continued, “he was the
devil himself. What I mean is, one life wasn’t enough to
satisfy him. He was a louse in real life, Doctor, but on stage
he was an honest-to-God king or an honest-to-God beggar,
right down to his toes. I’m telling you, that man would
wave his hand like he’d been ordering people around all his
life; and yet his father, you know, went door to door sharpening
knives. Wait, look at that: here the man’s shipwrecked
on a desert island, and his nails are manicured. What an
idiot. And see how that beard’s just glued on his face? If
Benda’d been playing that part, he’d have grown a real
beard, and he’d have real dirt under his nails . . . What is it,
Doctor, what’s come over you?”
“Excuse me,” stammered Dr. Goldberg, standing up,
“but I’ve just thought of something. Thanks very much.”
And he was already dashing out of the theater. Benda would
have grown a real beard, he repeated to himself. Benda did
grow a real beard! Why on earth didn’t I think of that
sooner?
“Police headquarters!” he shouted, flinging himself into
the nearest taxi. And when he got through to see the sergeant
on night duty, he demanded, with much shouting and
pleading, that the sergeant for God’s sake go find out immediately,
yes, immediately, whether on September second or
178
thereabouts they’d discovered the body of an unidentified
tramp anywhere, yes, anywhere. Contrary to all expectation,
the sergeant actually did go off somewhere to look it up or
to ask, more likely from boredom than from any particular
zeal or even interest. Meanwhile Dr. Goldberg was sweating
with anxiety, for a horrible thought had flashed across his
mind.
“Well, sir,” said the sergeant when he returned, “on the
morning of September second, a gamekeeper found the body
of an unidentified tramp, about forty years old, in the woods
at Krivoklat. On September third, the body of an unidentified
man was pulled out of the Elbe near Litomerice, about
thirty years of age, that had been in the water for at least
two weeks. On September tenth, an unidentified man of
about sixty hanged himself near Nemecky Brod . . . ”
“Are there any further details about the tramp?” Dr.
Goldberg asked breathlessly.
“Murder,” said the sergeant, looking attentively at the
agitated doctor. “According to the local police report, his
skull was crushed by a blunt object. The autopsy report
says: alcoholic; cause of death, injury to the brain. Here’s
the photograph,” offered the sergeant, adding, with the air
of an expert, “Man, they really walloped him.”
The photograph showed the body only from the waist
up. It was dressed in verminous rags, with a tattered calico
shirt open at the throat. Where the forehead and eyes should
have been was only a clump of matted hair and something
which might have once been skin and bone. Only the bristly
chin with its growth of stubble and the half-open mouth
bore any resemblance to a human being. Dr. Goldberg
trembled like a leaf. Is it . . . could it possibly be Benda?
“Did he . . . did he have any distinguishing characteristics?”
he managed to ask, overcome with misery.
The sergeant looked through a pile of papers. “Hm.
Height, five foot eight; dark hair turning gray; conspicuously
decayed teeth . . . ”
179
Dr. Goldberg heaved a loud sigh. “Then it’s not him.
Benda’s teeth were healthy as a horse’s. It’s not him. Forgive
me for bothering you,” he jabbered happily, “but that can’t
be him. Absolutely impossible.”
Absolutely impossible, he told himself with relief as he
returned home. It may be that he’s still alive. Perhaps, good
heavens, perhaps he’s sitting in a night club right this moment,
the Olympia or the Black Duck . . .
That night Dr. Goldberg again made the rounds of
Prague’s night life. He drank his glass of water in all the
spots where Benda had once reigned supreme, and he peered
through his gold goggles into every nook and corner, but
there was no sign of Benda anywhere. Then, towards morning,
the doctor suddenly turned pale, cursed himself aloud
for being an idiot, and raced off to his garage.
It was still early that same morning when he drove up
to a certain regional police headquarters and had the police
chief roused from his bed. Fortunately, it so happened that
he had once, with his own hands, gutted and sewn up the
gentleman and handed him, as a souvenir, his appendix
pickled in alcohol. As a result of this by no means surface
acquaintanceship, within two hours’ time he was in possession
of an exhumation order and watching, side by side with
the highly disgruntled coroner, as the corpse of the unidentified
tramp was disinterred.
“You can take my word for it,” grumped the coroner,
“the Prague police have already checked him out. It’s absolutely
impossible that he could have been Benda. He was
nothing but a bum, an utterly filthy bum.”
“Did he have lice?” Dr. Goldberg asked with interest.
“I don’t know,” the coroner said with disgust, “but you
won’t recognize anything on him now. After all, he’s been in
the ground for a whole month — ”
When the grave was opened, Dr. Goldberg had to send
for brandy; otherwise he could not have persuaded the
gravediggers to haul out and carry into the mortuary the
180
unspeakable object which had lain at the bottom of the
grave, sewn up in a sack.
“Go look at it yourself,” the coroner growled at Dr.
Goldberg, and he remained outside the mortuary, smoking a
strong cigar.
A short time later Dr. Goldberg staggered out of the
mortuary, white as death. “Come and look,” he said huskily,
and he returned to the body and pointed to the part that
had once been a man’s head. Dr. Goldberg then took a pair
of tweezers and pulled back what had once been lips to
reveal hideously decayed teeth or, rather, the yellow stumps
of teeth, stained black with caries.
“Take a good look,” muttered Goldberg as he thrust the
tweezers between the teeth and removed a strip of black
decay. Beneath it appeared two strong, shiny incisors. But
Dr. Goldberg could stand it no longer. He rushed out of the
mortuary, clutching his head in his hands.
When, somewhat later, he returned, he was pale and
greatly disheartened. “So much for those conspicuously
decayed teeth,” he said softly. “That was only a black paste
that actors put on their teeth when they play old codgers or
tramps. That filthy bum was an actor,” and with a despairing
wave of his hand, he added, “more than that, a great
actor.”
That same day Dr. Goldberg called on the industrialist
Korbel. He was a tall, powerful man with a chin like a
galosh and a body like a stone pillar.
“Sir,” said Dr. Goldberg, staring fixedly at him through
his convex glasses, “I have come to see you . . . in connection
with the actor Benda.”
“Indeed,” said the industrialist, and he sat back and
clasped his hands behind his head. “Has he turned up
again?”
“Partly,” remarked Dr. Goldberg. “I think it will be of
181
interest to you . . . if for no other reason than the movie
that you were going to do with him . . . that you were going
to finance, I mean.”
“What movie?” asked the large man indifferently. “I
don’t know anything about it.”
“I mean,” said Goldberg obstinately, “the movie in
which Benda was going to play a tramp . . . with your wife,
Greta, as the leading lady. In fact, it was to have been made
because of your wife,” the doctor added innocently.
“That’s none of your business,” snarled Korbel. “I
suppose Benda put that idea in your head . . . It was all
premature talk. There may have been a plot outline of sorts
. . . Benda told you that, didn’t he?”
“Not at all! You yourself gave him strict orders not to
breathe a word about it to anyone. You made it out to be a
big secret. But you know, during the last week of his life
Benda let his beard and hair grow so he’d look like a tramp.
He was very thorough about details like that, wasn’t he?”
“I don’t know,” snapped the industrialist. “Is there
anything else you want?”
“So this movie was to begin shooting on September
second, right? The first scene was to be played in the woods
at Krivoklat at daybreak. The tramp wakes up on the edge
of a clearing . . . in the morning mist . . . and shakes the
leaves and pine cones off his rags . . . I can just imagine
how Benda would have played that. I know he would’ve
worn his shabbiest rags and scruffiest shoes; he had a boxful
of them in the attic. That’s why, after his . . . disappearance,
not one item of his clothing was missing — I can’t believe
that never occurred to anyone! They should’ve known he’d
rig himself up from head to toe, with his sleeves in tatters
and a rope around his waist, just like a real tramp. That
was a passion with him, you know, taking great pains with
his costuming.”
“And what happened then?” asked the large man,
leaning farther back into the shadow of the living room.
182
“Although I don’t understand why you’re telling me all
this.”
“Because on September second, at about three o’clock
in the morning,” continued Dr. Goldberg obstinately, “you
came to pick him up . . . probably in a rental car, but
certainly in a closed one. I’m guessing your brother did the
driving, because he’s a good sport and he knows how to
keep his mouth shut. You’d arranged with Benda beforehand
that you wouldn’t go upstairs but just honk the horn from
the street. Shortly afterward, out came Benda . . . or, to be
more precise, out came a filthy, grizzled tramp. ‘Get a move
on,’ you told him, ‘the cameraman’s already gone on ahead.’
And you drove off to the woods at Krivoklat.”
“It would appear that you don’t know the car’s license
number,” the man in the shadow said sarcastically.
“If I knew it, I’d have had you arrrested by now,” Dr.
Goldberg said very matter-of-factly. “By daybreak you’d
arrived at the spot. It’s a sort of clearing, a glade rather,
surrounded by hundred-year-old oak trees — a beautiful
location, sir! I think your brother stayed with the car back
on the road and pretended he was working on the engine.
You led Benda about four hundred feet away from the road,
and that’s where you said: ‘Well, here we are.’ ‘Where’s the
cameraman?’ asked Benda. At that moment you struck him
the first blow.”
“With what?” came the voice of the man in the shadow.
“With a lead pipe,” said Dr. Goldberg, “because a
wrench would have been too light for a skull like Benda’s;
and you wanted to smash it to pieces, beyond recognition.
And after you’d struck the final blow, you went back to the
car. ‘Ready?’ asked your brother. But you probably didn’t
say anything, because murdering someone is no trifling
matter.”
“You’ve gone mad,” roared the man in the shadow.
“Not mad. I only wanted to remind you how it most
likely happened. You wanted to get Benda out of the way
183
because of the scandal involving your wife. Your wife was
carrying on much too openly — ”
“You stinking Jew,” raged the man in the armchair,
“how dare you — ”
“I’m not afraid of you,” said Dr. Goldberg, adjusting
his spectacles so that he looked even more uncompromising.
“There’s no way you can get at me, sir, no matter how rich
you are. What harm could you possibly do to me? Unless
you refuse to let me take out your appendix; which, sir, I
wouldn’t advise you to do.”
The man in the shadow gave way to quiet laughter.
“Listen,” he said, his tone unmistakably gleeful, “if you
knew for certain only a tenth of what you’ve been babbling
to me just now, you’d have gone to the police instead of me,
right?”
“That’s just it,” said Dr. Goldberg gravely. “If I could
prove even a tenth of it, sir, I wouldn’t be here. I don’t think
it could ever be proved. It couldn’t even be proved that that
filthy tramp was Benda. That’s precisely why I came here.”
“To threaten me, is that it?” the man in the armchair
shot back, and his hand reached for the bell.
“No, to scare you. It’s not likely you’re burdened with
an overly sensitive conscience; you’re too rich for that. But
the fact that someone else knows about the whole horrible
affair, that someone else knows you’re a murderer, that your
brother is a murderer, that the two of you murdered Benda
the actor, the knife-grinder’s son, the Great Benda — that,
sir, will shake your lordly composure till your dying day.
And as long as I’m alive, the two of you will have no peace
of mind. In truth, I’d like to see you on the gallows. But at
least, as long as I live, my very existence will unnerve you . .
. Benda was a malicious brute; I know better than anyone
how malicious he was, how conceited, cynical, insolent, and
anything else you want to call him; but he was an artist. All
your millions are worthless compared to that drunken
clown. With all your millions you’ll never accomplish what
184
he could do with one regal gesture of his hand — a fabricated
greatness but, for all that, the astonishing greatness of
the man — ” Dr. Goldberg threw up his hands in despair.
“How could you have done it? You’ll never know peace of
mind again, because I’ll never let you forget! Till my dying
day I’ll keep reminding you: Remember Benda the actor? He
was an artist, sir, do you hear me?”
185
An Attempt at Murder
That evening Mr. Tomsa, chief clerk in a government office,
had just settled down with his earphones and, with a gratified
smile, was listening to a pleasant performance of some
Dvorak dances on the radio — now that’s what I call music,
he said to himself contentedly — when suddenly two sharp
reports sounded outside, and the glass from the window
above his head shattered with a crash. Mr. Tomsa’s apartment,
it should be said, was on the ground floor.
And then he did what no doubt each of us would do.
First of all, he waited for a moment to see what might
happen next, then he snatched off his earphones and looked
around rather sternly to see what had happened, and only
then did he become frightened: for he saw that somebody
had fired two shots at him through the window next to
which he was sitting. Right over there, in the door he was
facing, a splinter of wood had been ripped away and beneath
it a bullet was embedded. His first impulse was to
rush out into the street and seize the villain by the collar
with his bare hands. But when a man is getting on in years
and has a certain dignity to maintain, he generally lets his
first impulse pass and opts instead for the second. And that
is why Mr. Tomsa raced for the telephone and called the
police. “Hello? Send somebody here at once; someone’s just
tried to murder me.”
“Send somebody where?” said a sleepy and indifferent
voice.
“Here, to my apartment,” Mr. Tomsa flared in sudden
anger, as if the police should have known. “It’s perfectly outrageous
that someone, for no reason at all, would shoot at a
186
law-abiding citizen sitting quietly at home! This calls for a
most thorough and immediate investigation, sir! It’s a fine
state of affairs when . . . ”
“Right,” the sleepy voice interrupted him. “I’ll send
someone over.”
Mr. Tomsa fumed with impatience. It seemed to him
that an eternity passed before the someone came trudging
along, but in reality it was only twenty minutes before an
even-tempered police inspector had arrived and was examining
the bullet holes in the window with interest.
“Someone’s been shooting at you, sir,” he said matterof-
factly.
“I could have told you that,” Mr. Tomsa burst out. “I
was sitting right here by the window!”
“Thirty-two caliber,” announced the inspector, extricating
a bullet from the door with his knife. “Looks as if it’s
been fired from an old army revolver. See? Whoever it is
must have been standing on the fence. If he’d been standing
on the sidewalk, the bullet would have gone in higher up.
That means he must have been aiming right at you, sir.”
“That’s odd,” Mr. Tomsa observed caustically. “And
here I thought he was aiming at the door.”
“And who did it?” asked the inspector, ignoring the
interruption.
“I’m sorry I can’t give you his address,” said Mr.
Tomsa. “I didn’t see the gentleman and I didn’t think to
invite him in.”
“That makes things difficult,” remarked the inspector,
unperturbed. “So who do you suspect?”
Mr. Tomsa’s patience was close to an end. “What do
you mean, suspect?” he launched out irritably. “Look,
Officer, I never saw the scoundrel, and even if he’d kindly
waited until I could blow him a kiss through the window, I
couldn’t have recognized him in the dark. My dear sir, if I
knew who it was, do you think I’d have put you to all this
trouble?”
187
“Well, yes, there’s something to that, sir,” the inspector
consoled him. “But maybe you can think of someone who’d
profit from your death, or who might want to get back at
you for something . . . . You see, sir, this wasn’t an attempt
at burglary; a burglar won’t shoot unless he has to. But
maybe somebody’s got a grudge against you. You tell us
who, sir, and we’ll look into it.”
Mr. Tomsa was taken aback: until that moment he
hadn’t thought about the matter in that light. “I haven’t the
faintest idea,” he said slowly, thinking back over the peaceful
life he had led as a government clerk and a bachelor.
“But who, for heaven’s sake, would have that kind of a
grudge against me?” he said in bewilderment. “As far as I
know, I haven’t a single enemy in the world! It’s completely
out of the question,” he added, shaking his head. “I simply
don’t have anything to do with other people. I keep almost
entirely to myself, I never go anywhere, I don’t meddle in
anyone’s affairs . . . What, for heaven’s sake, would somebody
want to get back at me for?”
The inspector shrugged his shoulders. “I don’t know, sir,
but maybe you’ll think of something by tomorrow. You
won’t be worried staying here by yourself?”
“No,” Mr. Tomsa said reflectively. That’s odd, he said
to himself uneasily when he was alone, why, yes why would
somebody want to shoot at me, of all people? I’m practically
a hermit, for heaven’s sake. I do my work at the office and I
go home — why, I hardly have anything to do with anyone
else! Then why would they want to shoot me? he wondered
with growing bitterness at such ingratitude; little by little he
began to feel sorry for himself. I slave away like a horse, he
said to himself, I even take work home with me, I’m never
extravagant, I never take time out for little pleasures, I live
like a snail in his shell, and bang! somebody comes along
and fires a bullet at me. My Lord, what incredible hatred
there is in people, marveled Mr. Tomsa, aghast. What have I
ever done to anyone? How could someone have such an
188
appalling, such an insane hatred for me?
Perhaps there’s some mistake, he reassured himself,
sitting on the bed and holding the boot he had just removed.
Of course! It’s a case of mistaken identity! The man simply
thought that I was someone else, someone he had a grudge
against! That must be it, he said to himself with relief,
because why, why would anyone hate me like that?
The boot fell from Mr. Tomsa’s hand. But of course, he
suddenly recalled with some embarrassment, it was a silly
thing for me to do, but it was really nothing more than a
slip of the tongue. I was talking with Roubal and, without
meaning to, I made an awkward remark about his wife. Of
course, everyone knows that woman’s cheating on him right
and left, and he knows it, too, but he doesn’t want people to
know that he does. And I, ass that I am, went and stupidly
let the cat out of the bag . . . . Mr. Tomsa remembered how
Roubal had merely swallowed hard and dug his nails into
his hands. Good heavens, he said to himself in horror, the
man was crushed! Obviously he’s madly in love with that
woman! Naturally, I tried to smooth things over afterwards,
but the man was biting his lips in anger! He’s got good
reason to hate me, Mr. Tomsa reflected sadly. I know he
wasn’t the one who shot at me, that’s nonsense; but I certainly
wouldn’t be surprised if . . .
Mr. Tomsa stared at the floor in confusion. Or what
about that tailor, he reminded himself uncomfortably. For
fifteen years I ordered my clothes from him, and then one
day I was told that he had a bad case of consumption. Of
course, a man’s apprehensive about wearing clothes that a
consumptive tailor has been coughing on, so I stopped
getting my suits from him . . . And then he came to see me
and pleaded that he hadn’t a stitch of work, his wife was
sick and he needed to send his children away, and could he
have the honor of my confidence in him again — Good
heavens, how pale the poor man looked, and from the way
he was sweating I could see how ill he was! “Mr. Kolinsky,”
189
I said to him, “look, it’s no use, I need a better tailor; I’ve
not been satisfied with your work.” “I do my very best, sir,”
he stammered, sweating with fear and bewilderment, and it’s
a wonder he didn’t burst out crying. And I, Mr. Tomsa
reminded himself, I just sent him away saying, “I’ll see,” the
sort of remark poor wretches like that hear only too often.
The man might well hate me, Mr. Tomsa shuddered; it’s
horrible to go and beg someone for your very life and be
sent away with such indifference. But what could I have
done for him? I know he couldn’t have been the one who
did it, but . . .
Mr. Tomsa began to feel more and more distressed. But
what’s just as painful, he remembered, is the way I bawled
out our file clerk. I couldn’t find a certain file, so I sent for
the old fellow and and yelled at him as if he’d been a
schoolboy, and in front of other people, too! “I suppose this
is what you call keeping things in order, you idiot, the place
looks like a pigsty; I ought to throw you out on your ear —
” And then I found the file in my own drawer! And the old
man never said a word, only stood there trembling and
blinking his eyes — Mr. Tomsa felt a hot surge of shame
welling over him. A man can’t very well apologize to a
subordinate, he told himself without conviction, even if he
has been a little hard on him. But how those subordinates
must hate their supervisors! Wait, I’ll give the poor devil
some of my old clothes; on second thought, that would be
humiliating for him, too —
Mr. Tomsa now found it unbearable to go on lying in
bed; the blankets were stifling him. He sat up, wrapped his
arms around his knees, and stared into the darkness. Or that
business with young Moravek at the office, he thought, sick
at heart. He’s such a sensitive young man, writes poems and
all. And when he blundered so badly in dealing with those
papers, I told him, “Young man, you’ll have to do these all
over again,” and I meant to throw the papers down on the
table; but they landed at his feet, and when he bent down to
190
pick them up his face grew red, his ears were red — I could
have bitten off my tongue, Mr. Tomsa muttered. I really like
that lad, and to humiliate him like that, however unintended
—
Another face floated before Mr. Tomsa’s eyes: the pale
and swollen face of his colleague Wankl. Poor Wankl, he
said to himself, he wanted to be chief clerk, and I got the
promotion instead. It would have meant a few hundred more
a year, and he’s got six children — I’ve heard he’d like to
have his eldest daughter trained as a singer, but he can’t
afford it; and I was promoted over him because he’s such a
slow-witted plodder, a real drudge — His wife has a terrible
temper, but the reason she’s so scraggy and bad-tempered is
that she’s always having to pinch pennies; he chews away on
dry rolls for lunch — Mr. Tomsa lapsed into gloomy
thought. Poor Wankl, he must have all kinds of bad feelings
when he sees me, with no family at all, making more than
he does; but I can’t help that, can I? It makes me uneasy,
though, when he looks at me in that injured, reproachful
way . . .
Mr. Tomsa rubbed his forehead, which had broken out
in an agonizing sweat. Yes, he said to himself, and then
there’s that waiter who cheated me on my bill; and I called
for the owner, and he fired the waiter on the spot. “You
thief,” he snarled at him, “I’ll see that you don’t find another
job anywhere in Prague!” And the man never said a
word, just left . . . I could see his shoulder blades sticking
out under his jacket.
Mr. Tomsa now found it unbearable to stay on the bed;
he sat down by his radio and slipped on his earphones, but
the radio was mute in the still, mute hours of the night. Mr.
Tomsa covered his face with his hands and recalled all the
people he had ever met, the odd and inconsequential people
with whom he had never really gotten along and to whom
he had never really given a second thought.
In the morning he stopped by the police station; he was
191
somewhat pale and distracted. “So,” the inspector asked,
“have you thought of anyone who might have a grudge
against you?”
Mr. Tomsa shook his head. “I don’t know,” he said
hesitantly. “What I mean is, the people who might hold a
grudge against me, there are so many that . . . ” He waved
his hand, baffled. “The fact of the matter is, a man never
knows how many people he’s wronged. You know, I’m just
not going to sit by that window anymore. And I’ve come to
ask you to forget the whole thing.”
192
Released on Parole
“How about it, Zaruba, do you understand?” the prison
warden asked when he had finished reading, almost ceremoniously,
the official document from the Ministry of Justice.
“It means that you have been paroled from the remainder of
your life sentence. You have served twelve-and-a-half years,
and throughout that time your conduct has been . . . well,
simply put, exemplary. We’ve given you the best of references,
and . . . ah . . . in a word, you can go home now, do
you understand? But remember, Zaruba, if you get into any
trouble, your parole will be revoked and you will have to
serve out your life sentence for the murder of your wife,
Marie, and then not even God can help you. So watch your
step, Zaruba; next time will be for the rest of your life.”
The warden was so moved that he blew his nose. “You’ve
been a favorite of ours, Zaruba, but I don’t want to see you
here again. So Godspeed, and the disbursements officer will
pay you your money. You may go.”
Zaruba, a lanky fellow nearly six foot six, shuffled his
feet and stammered something or other; he was so happy
that it almost hurt, and inside he was shaken by something
very much like sobbing.
“Come, come,” the warden said gruffly. “Don’t start
crying here. We’ve arranged for some clothes for you, and
Mr. Malek, the builder, promised me he’d give you a job —
What’s that, you want to go see your home first? Oh, to see
your wife’s grave. Well, that’s very decent of you. Then have
a safe journey, Mr. Zaruba,” the warden said hastily, and he
shook Zaruba’s hand. “And for goodness’ sake, be careful
what you do; remember that you’re only on the outside
193
conditionally.”
“He’s a good man,” the warden said, as soon as the
door had shut behind Zaruba. “I’ll tell you, Formanek, these
murderers tend to be pretty decent folks. The worst of the
lot are the embezzlers; nothing in jail’s ever good enough for
them. But my heart goes out to Zaruba.”
Once Zaruba had the iron gates and courtyard of
Pankrac Prison behind him, he had the uneasy and abject
feeling that the nearest guard would grab him and steer him
back again; he dawdled a bit, so that he wouldn’t appear to
be making a break for it. When he reached the street, his
head reeled, all those people out there, children running
around, two drivers quarreling with each other, God in
heaven, there didn’t used to be so many people, which way
do I go? Makes no difference; nothing but cars, and all
those women, is anybody following me? no, but look at all
the cars! Zaruba dashed off, heading down the street towards
Prague, to get as far away as he could. A tempting
smell from a smoked-meats shop drifted by, but not now,
not yet; then a more powerful smell tempted him: a construction
site. Zaruba the bricklayer stopped and sniffed the
fine aroma of mortar and beams. He watched the way an
old codger was mixing lime; he longed for a bit of friendly
conversation, but somehow he couldn’t manage it, his voice
wouldn’t crawl out, in solitary you lose the habit of talking.
Lengthening his stride, Zaruba continued down the middle
of the street towards Prague. God in heaven, all kinds of
buildings! They’re making them all out of concrete, it wasn’t
like that twelve years ago, no, it wasn’t like that in my time,
thought Zaruba, but they’ll fall down for sure, thin uprights
like that! “Watch out, man, are you blind or what?” He was
nearly run over by a car, he nearly stumbled under a clanking
streetcar; after twelve years, you’re no longer accustomed
to streets. He would have liked to ask somebody what that
big building was; he would have liked to ask how to get to
the Northwest train station; as a truck filled with iron
194
rumbled past, he tried saying to himself out loud: “Excuse
me, how do I get to the Northwest train station?” No, it’s
no good; somehow his voice must have dried up inside him
or something, you get rusty, go dumb, back in that place;
the first three years he could still ask somebody a question
every now and again, but after that he’d just quit. “Excuse
me, how do I — ?” a rattling sound issued from his throat,
but it was not a human voice.
Zaruba ran on down the street, his stride increasing. He
felt as if he were drunk or walking in his sleep. It was all
quite different from twelve years ago, bigger, noisier, more
confusing. What a lot of people! The sight only made
Zaruba sad, it seemed to him that he was in a foreign
country somewhere and that he could not even talk with
these people. If only he could get to the train station and go
home, home . . . His brother had a cottage and children
there . . . “Excuse me, how do I — ?” Zaruba tried to utter
the words, but his lips moved soundlessly. Never mind, it’ll
wear off once I’m home, I’ll be able to talk once I’m home;
if I could only get to the train station!
Suddenly there was a shout from behind him, and
someone shoved him onto the sidewalk. “Why don’t you
walk where you’re supposed to?” a driver bawled. Zaruba
would have liked to answer, but it was no use; he could only
make a croaking sound before running on. On the sidewalk?
he thought to himself, but the sidewalk’s too small for me.
Oh, people, I’m in such a hurry, I want to go home, excuse
me, how do I get to the Northwest train station? That must
be the street, he decided, it’s the biggest, it’s got a whole line
of streetcars. But look at all the people on it, where did they
all come from? Why, there’s crowds and crowds, all headed
the same direction, it has to be to the train station, that’s
why they’re in such a hurry, so they don’t miss the train.
The lanky Zaruba strode at a faster pace, so as not to be
left behind. But look, even these sidewalks aren’t big enough
to hold all these people, they’re spreading out all across the
195
street, a dense and clamorous throng; and new people
continue to join them, moving along swiftly and shouting
something; and now they’ve all begun to shout in an immense,
unrelenting roar.
Zaruba’s head was in a rapturous whirl from the din.
God in heaven, how beautiful it was, all these people! At the
front of the crowd they’ve begun to sing a marching song.
Zaruba gets into step with the others and tramps forward in
exhilaration; look, now all the people around him are
singing. Something thaws and wells up in Zaruba’s throat, as
if pressing against him, it forces itself out and it is a song,
left right, left right, Zaruba is singing a song without words,
he drones and growls to himself in a deep bass noise, what
song is this? no matter, I’m going home, I’m going home!
The long-legged Zaruba is tramping along in the front row
now and singing. There are no words to his song, but it’s so
beautiful, left right, left right, with upraised hands Zaruba
trumpets like an elephant, he feels as if his whole body is
ringing with sound, his belly vibrates like a drum, his chest
rumbles loudly, and in his throat is a feeling so good, so
fine, like when you’re drinking or crying. Thousands of
people are shouting: “Down with the government!” but
Zaruba cannot grasp their words and goes on blaring in
exultation, “A-ah! A-ah!” Waving his long arms, Zaruba
marches at the head of them all, braying and bellowing,
singing and roaring, drumming on his chest with his fists
and bursting out in a vast howl that swells above the heads
of all like a soaring banner. “Oo-a-vah, oo-a-vah!” Zaruba
trumpets, his voice, his lungs, his heart filled to the utmost,
and he closes his eyes and crows like a cock. “A-oo-vah!
Aaah! Hurraah!” Now for some reason the crowd halts, it
cannot move forward, it swerves back in a confused surge,
panting and scuffling, shrieking in agitation. “Oo-a-vah!
Hurraah!” Zaruba, eyes shut, surrenders to this great and
liberated voice that arises from within. Suddenly someone’s
hands clutch him and a winded voice rasps in his ear: “I
196
arrest you in the name of the law!”
Zaruba opens his eyes in alarm. A policeman is clinging
to one of his arms and dragging him out of the crowd,
which is swaying convulsively. Zaruba moans with terror
and tries to wrench his arm away from the policeman, who
is twisting it. Zaruba roars in pain and, using his other hand
like a mallet, clouts the policeman on the head. The
policeman’s face flushes and he lets go; but then he strikes
Zaruba on the head with a truncheon, and again, again,
again! The two huge arms begin spinning like the arms of a
windmill, descending on several heads. Then two helmeted
forms fasten onto him like bulldogs, Zaruba is choking with
fear and trying to shake them off, striking out around him,
shuddering like a madman. He is shoved and hauled off
somewhere, two policemen leading him, his arms jerked
behind his back, along the empty street, left right, left right.
Zaruba accompanies them like a lamb; excuse me, how do I
get to the Northwest train station? I have to go home.
The two policemen practically flung him head first into
the station.
“What’s your name?” a cold, harsh voice bawled at
him.
Zaruba wanted to speak, but only his lips moved.
“Out with it, what’s your name?” the harsh voice
bellowed.
“Antonin Zaruba,” the lanky man whispered hoarsely.
“Where do you live?”
Zaruba shrugged his shoulders helplessly. “In Pankrac,”
he forced out. “In solitary.”
No doubt it shouldn’t have happened, but it did; three
lawyers — the judge, the public prosecutor, and the courtappointed
counsel for the defense — discussed how they
could get Zaruba off.
“Well, you could just have Zaruba deny everything,”
197
offered the public prosecutor.
“Won’t work,” grumbled the judge. “He already confessed
under questioning that he battled it out with the
police. Since the tomfool’s already confessed — ”
“If the policemen,” suggested the defense counsel, “were
to testify that they couldn’t identify Zaruba with absolute
certainty, that it might have been someone else — ”
“Wait a minute,” the public prosecutor objected, “we
can’t very well instruct the police to lie! Besides, they’ve
already identified him beyond any doubt — I’d go for a plea
of temporary insanity. Propose an inquiry into the state of
his mind, and I’ll back you up.”
“No problem,” said the defense counsel. “I’ll propose it,
but suppose the doctors say he was sane?”
“I’ll talk to them,” the judge volunteered. “I shouldn’t,
of course, but — Damn it all, I’d hate to see this Zaruba
sitting out the rest of his life in solitary just for being such a
tomfool. I’d rather see him anywhere but there. Good God,
I’d give him six months without batting an eye. But if he has
to serve out his life sentence in prison, gentlemen, it would
make me damned unhappy, damned sick.”
“If temporary insanity doesn’t do the trick,” remarked
the public prosecutor, “it’ll be pretty nasty for him. The
confounded thing is, I’ve got to prosecute this as a criminal
offense. What other choice do I have? If only that idiot had
stopped by a tavern somewhere, we could back up the
insanity plea, show that he wasn’t accountable for his
actions or something — ”
“Please, gentlemen, work it out somehow,” urged the
judge, “so that I can discharge him. I’m an old man, and I
don’t want the responsibility of — I’m sure you understand
what I mean.”
“Difficult case,” sighed the public prosecutor. “Well,
we’ll see. At any rate, the psychiatrists will keep things
going for a while. The trial’s tomorrow, right?”
198
But the case never came to trial. That night Antonin Zaruba
hanged himself, evidently from fear of the punishment that
lay in store for him. Because he was so very tall, he was
found hanging in a curious posture, as if he were sitting on
the ground.
“Rotten business,” muttered the public prosecutor. “My
God, what a stupid business. But at any rate there’s nothing
we could have done about it.”
199
The Crime at the Post Office
“Talk about Justice,” said Police Sergeant Brejcha. “I’d like
to know why the pictures always show some female with a
bandage on her eyes and the sort of scales they use to weigh
peppers. What I mean is, Justice seems more like a policeman,
to me. You wouldn’t believe the things us policemen
pass judgment on, without any judge, without any scales,
and without all the fuss and feathers. In a few cases we tap
a few jaws, and in most cases we undo our belts, but in
ninety cases out of a hundred that’s all justice is. But I’ll tell
you right now, mister, I proved two people guilty of murder
all by myself, and I was the one what sentenced them to just
punishment and even decided what that punishment was to
be, and I’ve never said a word about it to nobody. But I’m
going to tell it to you right now.
“You’ll recall, mister, that little miss what worked here
two years ago in our village post office? Sure, Helenka, that
was her name. She was such a good, kind girl, pretty as a
picture. Not likely you’d forget her. Well, this Helenka,
mister, last summer she drowned herself; she jumped in that
big pond near here and went out maybe fifty-five yards until
she got to the deep part, and she didn’t wash up for two
days. And you know why she did it? On that same day
when she drowned herself, there was this auditor from
Prague who suddenly turned up at our post office and found
out Helenka was short a couple hundred crowns from the
cash drawer. A miserable couple hundred, mister. That
bonehead of an auditor said he was going to report it and
there’d be an investigation, like for embezzlement. But that
evening, mister, Helenka drowned herself — from shame.
200
“When they pulled her out, over by the dike, I had to
stay with her till the coroner came. There wasn’t anything
pretty about her then, poor girl, but the whole time I kept
seeing her the way she used to be, smiling behind the window
at the post office — well, we all hung around there
because of her, you know; everybody liked that girl. Damn
it, I said to myself, that girl never stole no two hundred
crowns. In the first place, I just didn’t believe it; and in the
second place, she sure didn’t need to steal: her daddy was
the miller over on the other side of town, and she was only
there at the post office because of some female urge to make
her own living for herself. I knew her daddy well, mister; he
was sort of a literary type and a Protestant, too; and let me
tell you, mister, these Protestant religious scribblers around
here, they never steal nothing. Mister, I promised that dead
girl right there on the dike that I wasn’t going to let this
business drop.
“All right then, the next thing that happens is they send
some smart young man from Prague down here to the post
office, name of Filipek; a very pleasant, toothy sort of
fellow. Well, I went over to the post office to see this
Filipek, because I wanted to check something out. It’s just
like all these other small-town post offices, you know: a
counter with a little window, and on the clerk’s side a little
cash drawer for stamps and money, and right in back of the
clerk is this sort of shelf, with a bunch of ratebooks and
notices and papers and a scale for weighing packages and
things like that. ‘Mr. Filipek,’ I says to him, ‘please take a
look in those ratebooks and tell me how much it costs to
send a cable to Buenos Aires, say.’
“‘Three crowns a word,’ says Filipek, without batting
an eyelash.
“‘Then how much for a telegram to Hong Kong?’ I ask
him again.
“‘I’d have to look it up,’ says Filipek, and he gets up
and turns around to look at the ratebook. And while he’s
201
going through the book with his back to the counter, I
squeeze my shoulders through the little window and reach
my hand over to the cash drawer and pull it out. And it
opens very nice and quiet.
“‘Thanks, I’ve got it,’ says I; and that’s how it could
have happened. Suppose Helenka was looking something up
in the ratebook. Right then, somebody could have swiped
the two hundred from the cash drawer. ‘Take a look, Mr.
Filipek, and see if you can tell me who sent a telegram or a
package from here in the last few days.’
“Mr. Filipek scratches his head and says, ‘Sergeant, it
can’t be done. You see, that amounts to something like
confidentiality of the mail — unless you do your looking in
the name of the law. But I would have to notify the head
office that a search has taken place.’
“‘Hold on,’ I says to him, ‘I don’t care to do that for
the present. But look, if you was to more or less . . . just for
lack of something better to do . . . sort of poke through
those papers and see if maybe somebody did send something
from here, so that maybe Helenka had to turn her back
away from the counter — ‘
“‘Sergeant,’ says Mr. Filipek, ‘what if she did? Telegram
forms’ll be here, but for registered letters and packages we
only have a record of who something was sent to — not
who sent it. I’ll make a list for you of all the names I find
here. Actually, I’m not even supposed to do that, but for you
I will. But I don’t think you’ll learn beans from it.’
“Filipek was right about that. He handed me maybe
thirty names — you know, not much goes on in a village
post office, only a parcel now and then for some lad in the
service — and there wasn’t a pin in the pickings. Mister, I
went out and walked and talked that case to myself from
seven sides, but to no use. And it plagued me that I wasn’t
keeping my promise to poor Helenka.
“Then one day, it must have been about a week later, I
went back to the post office again. This Filipek looks me
202
over and says, ‘Say goodbye to your bowling partner, Sergeant;
I’m moving out. A new girl’s coming tomorrow, from
the post office in Pardubice.’
“‘Aha,’ says I to that. ‘Some kind of demotion, no
doubt, transferring this girl from the big city to such a
crummy little village post office.’
“‘Not at all,’ says Filipek, and he gives me a kind of
peculiar look. ‘Sergeant, this girl’s being transferred here at
her own request.’
“‘That’s odd,’ says I, ‘but then you know how women
are.’
“‘Odd it is,’ says Filipek, but he goes on looking at me.
‘And odder still is that the anonymous letter which brought
about that flash-flood postal audit also came from
Pardubice.’
“I whistled, and then I realized that Filipek and I were
staring at each other in the very same way. And then suddenly
old Uher, the postman, who was sorting the mail for
delivery, he speaks up and says, ‘Yeah, sure, Pardubice.
That’s where the supervisor over at the big estate writes to,
almost every day; some young lady there at the post office.
Yeah, sure, she’s his sweetie.’
“‘Listen, grandpa,’ says Filipek, ‘do you know what her
name is?’
“‘Something like Julie Touf— Toufar— ‘
“‘Tauferova,’ says Filipek. ‘That’s her. That’s the one
who’s coming here.’
“‘That Houdek,’ says old Uher, ‘that Houdek what’s the
supervisor there, he gets a letter back from Pardubice, too,
almost every day. Mr. Supervisor, I tell him, here’s a letter
from your sweetie again. He always walks down the road to
meet me. I’ve got this here little parcel for him today; it got
sent back to him from Prague. See how it’s stamped: Recipient
Unknown. He got the address wrong, Mr. Supervisor
did. So I’m taking it back to him.’
“‘Show it to me,’ says Filipek, and he looks it over. ‘It’s
203
addressed to somebody named Novak, Spalena Street,
Prague. Contents: four pounds of butter. Postmark: July 14.’
“‘That’s when Miss Helenka was still here,’ says old
Uher.
“‘Show it to me,’ I says to Filipek, and I take a sniff at
it. ‘Mr. Filipek,’ I says, ‘that’s odd, but this here butter was
ten days on the road and it don’t even stink. Grandpa, you
just leave this package here and go off on your rounds.’
“Old Uher was hardly gone when Filipek says to me,
‘Sergeant, this is against all the rules, but here’s a penknife.’
And then he left so’s he wouldn’t have to watch.
“Mister, I tore open that package, and inside there
wasn’t nothing but four pounds of dirt. So I go find Filipek
right away and I tell him, ‘Don’t say anything about this to
anyone, understand? I’m going to take care of this business
myself.’
“You can bet I pulled myself together and set right out
after this Houdek over at the estate. He was sitting there on
a pile of planks, just staring at the ground. ‘Mr. Supervisor,’
says I, ‘there’s some kind of mix-up over there at our post
office. You recall what address it was on that little package
you sent to Prague ten or twelve days ago?’
“Houdek looks a little funny and then he says, ‘It
doesn’t matter; and anyway, I don’t remember now what it
was.’
“‘Mr. Supervisor,’ I says to him, ‘it’s this way. You
killed our Helenka from the post office. You sent a package
from there with a fake address so she’d have to weigh it on
the scales. And while she was doing that, you snuck inside
the cash drawer and stole two hundred crowns. Because of
those two hundred crowns, Mr. Supervisor, Helenka
drowned herself. That’s how it is.’
“I tell you, mister, that Houdek was shaking like a leaf.
‘That’s a lie,’ he cries, ‘why would I steal two hundred
crowns?’
“‘Because you wanted to have your sweetheart, Julie
204
Tauferova, here at our post office. That girlfriend of yours
sent an anonymous letter saying Helenka was missing money
from the cash drawer. It’s just like the two of you pushed
Helenka in the pond. It’s just like the two of you killed her.
You have murder on your conscience, Mr. Houdek.’
“That Houdek, he tumbled down on the planks and he
covered up his face, and never, never did I ever see a man
cry like that. ‘Jesus Christ,’ he was wailing, ‘Jesus Christ, I
couldn’t know she’d drown herself! I only thought she’d be
let go . . . that she’d just go back home! Officer, all I
wanted to do was marry Julie! But one of us would have
had to give up our jobs if we were going to be together . . .
and we can’t live on one salary . . . that’s why I wanted so
much for Julie to get the job here at the post office! We’ve
already been waiting five years . . . Sergeant, we love each
other so much, so much!’
“Mister, I’m not going to tell you the rest. It was almost
nighttime, and here was this fellow Houdek down on his
knees in front of me, and me blubbering over the whole
business — I was blubbering like a ninety-year-old bride,
over Helenka and over everybody else, too.
“‘That’s enough,’ I finally says to him, ‘that’s enough.
I’ve already had it up to here. Now hand over those two
hundred crowns. Right. And now listen: if it occurs to you
to marry Miss Tauferova before I set this whole business
straight, then I’ll charge you with theft — understand? But if
you shoot yourself or do anything else like that, I’ll go
ahead and tell why you did it. And that’s that.’
“That night, mister, I sat in judgment on those two,
there under the stars. I asked God how I should punish
them, and I truly understood the joy and the bitterness of
justice. If I did bring charges against them, this Houdek
would get a couple of weeks in jail and then go on probation;
and still it would be hard to prove. Houdek killed that
girl — but he wasn’t a common thief. To me, every punishment
was either too big or too small. So that’s why I was
205
judging and punishing them myself.
“The next morning, I went back to the post office.
Sitting there behind the window was this tall, pale girl with
fierce, burning eyes. ‘Miss Tauferova,’ says I, ‘I have a
registered letter here,’ and I gave her a letter addressed:
Director of Postal Communications, Prague. She looked at
me and she stuck the label on.
“‘Just a minute, miss,’ I said. ‘Inside this letter is a
charge against the person who stole two hundred crowns
from your predecessor. What’s the postage?’
“Mister, there was a terrible strength in that woman; all
the same, she turned ashy pale and stiff as a stone. ‘Three
crowns fifty,’ she said, hardly breathing.
“I counted out the money and said, ‘Here you are, miss.
But if those two hundred crowns should happen to turn up
here — fallen down or misplaced somewhere, you understand?
— so that everyone will know that poor, dead
Helenka didn’t steal them, well then, miss, then I could take
back my letter. Now what about it?’
“She didn’t say a word; she just sat there, fierce and
burning and stiff like I’ve never seen anybody before, anywhere.
“‘The postman will be here in five minutes, miss,’ I
said. ‘What about it, then. Shall I mail the letter?’
“She shook her head right away. So I picked up the
letter and walked out in front of the post office. Mister, I’ve
never marked time in such suspense. And then, twenty
minutes later, old Uher ran out crying, ”Officer, it’s been
found! The two hundred crowns Miss Helenka was missing!
They’re found! That new girl found them in one of the
ratebooks! It was all a mistake!’
“‘Grandpa,’ I told him, ‘go run and tell everybody that
the two hundred crowns have been found. You know, so
that everybody will know that Helenka didn’t steal them,
thank God!’
“So then, that was the first thing. The second thing was
206
to go see the owner of the big estate. You probably don’t
know him; he’s a count — a little crazy, but a very nice
man. ‘Sir,’ I tell him, ‘don’t ask me any questions, but there’s
a little matter here we have to hang together on. Call your
supervisor, Houdek, and tell him he has to leave today for
your place in Moravia. If he doesn’t want to go, tell him
you’re giving him an hour’s notice.’
“The old count raised his eyebrows and stared at me
for a while. Mister, there’s no way I could have forced
myself to look more serious than I did, more so than anyone
can imagine. ‘Very well,’ says the count, ‘I won’t ask you
any questions. And furthermore, I’ll summon Houdek now.’
“Houdek came, and when he saw me with the count he
turned pale, but he stood straight as a stick. ‘Houdek,’ says
the count, ‘harness the horses and get down to the train
station. You begin service this evening at my estate in Hulin.
I’ll send a telegram so they’ll be expecting you. Do you
understand?’
“‘Yes,’ Houdek said quietly, and he fixed his eyes on
me, like the eyes of the damned in hell.
“‘Have you any objections?’ the count asked.
“‘No,’ said Houdek hoarsely, and he never let his eyes
drop from me. Mister, those eyes were agony to me.
“‘Then you must go,’ says the count, and that was that.
After a minute or so I saw them taking Houdek away in the
coach. He sat there like a wooden puppet.
“And that’s the whole story, mister. But if you go to the
post office, you’ll see this pale, pale woman there. She’s
mean and angry at everyone, and she’s getting old, mean
lines in her face. I don’t know if she ever sees her supervisor;
maybe she does go visit him sometimes, but then she
comes back again meaner and angrier than before. And I see
this happen and I say to myself: There must be Justice.
“I’m only a policeman, mister, but I’m telling you from
my own experience: Whether there’s some kind of allknowing,
all-powerful God, I don’t know; even if there is,
207
it’s no use to us. But I tell you, Somebody has to be greater
and more just than we are. That’s the certain truth, mister.
We can only punish, but there has to be a somebody, somewhere,
who can forgive. I tell you, mister, truth and the
highest justice are just as strange as love.”
208
TALES FROM THE
OTHER POCKET
209
The Stolen Cactus
“Let me tell you,” said Mr. Kubat, “about what happened to
me last summer.
“I was at my summer place, which is like most summer
places: no water, no woods, no fish, no nothing. On the
other hand, it’s heavily populist, politically, and there’s a
residents association with an active secretary, a button-andbead
factory, and a post office with a nosy old postmistress.
In a word, just the way it is everywhere else. Well, after
perhaps two weeks of indulging in the wholesome and
hygienic effects of uninterrupted boredom, I began to sense
that the local rumormongers and, for that matter, public
opinion in general were viewing me somehow or other in a
very unflattering light. And because my mail arrived conspicuously
well-glued, so that the whole back of the envelope
was gleaming with gum arabic, I said to myself: Obviously,
someone is opening my mail. Damn that old witch of
a post- mistress! Postal workers are supposed to be clever at
unsealing envelopes, you know. I’ll fix that, I told myself,
and I sat down immediately and began to write in my finest
penmanship: ‘You loathsome ghoul of a postmistress, you
old snoop, you peeping busybody, you meddling frump, you
viper, you fossilized old hag, you harpy, and so on, Sincerely
yours, Jan Kubat.’ Listen, Czech is a rich and precise language.
In the space of a single breath I’d dashed off thirtyfour
expressions which a forthright and respectable man may
apply to any lady without becoming personal or intrusive.
Then I cheerfully sealed it, addressed the envelope to myself,
and went off to the nearest town to put it in a mailbox. The
next day I hurried to the post office and with the sweetest of
210
smiles stuck my head through the window opening. ‘Madame
Postmistress,’ said I, ‘is there any mail for me today?’
‘I’m pressing charges, you rotter,’ the postmistress glared
back, with the most horrible look I’d ever seen. ‘Why,
Madame Postmistress,’ I said sympathetically, ‘you haven’t
been reading something unpleasant, I hope.’ And then I got
out of there, fast.”
“That’s nothing,” Mr. Holan said disapprovingly — he was
the head gardener at the Holben greenhouses. “That strategy
was too simple. I should tell you how I set a trap for a
cactus thief. Old Mr. Holben is a phenomenal cactus-fancier,
you know, and his cactus collection, I’m not kidding, must
be worth three hundred thousand, not even counting the
one-of-a-kind specimens. The old gentleman is very particular
about making the collection open to the public. ‘Holan,’
he says, ‘it’s a noble hobby, it has to be nurtured in people.’
But I’m thinking to myself instead that when some young
cactus-lover sees the golden Gruson, let’s say, which is easily
worth twelve hundred, it’ll only break his heart because it
isn’t his. But what the old gentleman wants, he gets. Then,
this past year, we began to notice that some cacti were
disappearing on us; and it wasn’t just some of those everybody
and his brother wants to own, but ones that were
special. One day it was a Echinocactus Wislizenii, the next
time it was a Graessnerii, then a Wittia imported right out
of Costa Rica, then a species nova that Fric sent, after that a
Melocactus Leopoldii, that’s a unique specimen no one in
Europe’s seen for over fifty years, and finally a Pilocereus
fimbriatus from San Domingo, the first one that ever came
to Europe. Listen, that thief must have been some kind of
con- noisseur!
You wouldn’t believe how the old man raged. ‘Mr.
Holben,’ I told him, ‘just close down your greenhouses, and
that’ll put an end to it.’ ‘You’re wrong there,’ the old man
211
cried, ‘a cultivated taste like this is for everyone. You must
catch that scurvy thief; sack the gatekeeper, hire a new one,
alert the police, and all that. This is a serious matter. With
thirty-six thousand pots, we can’t post a guard over every
single one.’ So at least I hired two retired police detectives to
be on the lookout; and what should happen but we lose that
Pilocereus fimbriatus, and the only thing left behind is a
dimple in the dirt. By that time I was so mad I started
keeping on the lookout for the cactus thief myself.
“What you need to understand is that real cactus-lovers
are something like a sect of dervishes. I think that instead of
whiskers they grow bristles and prickles, that’s how crazy
they are about them. We’ve got two of those sects around
here, the Association of Cactus Fanciers and the Federation
of Cactus Fanciers. How they’re different from each other, I
don’t know — I think that one believes cacti have immortal
souls, while the other makes sacrifices to them; at any rate,
these two sects mutually hate and persecute each other with
fire and sword here on earth and probably in heaven as
well. Anyway, I went around to the presidents of these two
sects and in all confidentiality asked each of them if they
had any opinion as to who — maybe someone from the
other sect — might have pilfered the Holben cacti. When I
told them which rare cacti we’d lost, they swore with absolute
certainty that no member of the rival cult could have
pilfered them because they were such a bunch of botchers,
bunglers, and ignoramuses, they didn’t have the faintest idea
what a Wislizen or a Graessner was, let alone a Pilocereus
fimbriatus. As for their own members, they’d vouch for their
honesty and high-mindedness; they weren’t capable of
pilfering anything, except for certain kinds of cactus, of
course; but if any one of them did have one of those
Wislizenas, then he would surely have pilfered the rest as
well for worship and religious orgies — but they, the presidents,
wouldn’t know anything about that. After which both
honorable gentlemen told me that, besides those two publicly
212
recognized and tolerated sects, there are also rogue cactuslovers,
and they’re supposed to be the worst of all. They’re
the ones those two moderate sects can’t stomach, and
nobody else can, either, because they’re fanatics and they
indulge in all kinds of heresies and violence. And it’s said
these rogue cactus-fanciers are capable of anything.
“Since I didn’t get anywhere with these two gentlemen,
I climbed up in this nice maple in our park and thought
things over. Let me tell you, it’s best to think things over in
the crown of a tree. Up there, you’re more or less detached
from everything. You sway back and forth with it a bit, and
all the while you’re contemplating things from a loftier point
of view. I think philosophers ought to live in trees, just like
orioles. And up in that maple I worked out a plan. First I
made the rounds of my gardener friends and asked them,
‘Boys, do you have any cacti that are rotting on you? Old
Mr. Holben needs them for his experiments.’ That way I
picked up a couple of hundred sick ones, and during the
night I stuck them in with Holben’s collection. I didn’t say a
word for two days, and the third day I gave out this statement
to the newspapers:
World-famous Holben Collection Menaced
We have learned that a large portion of the peerless
Holben Collection was stricken by a new and hitherto
unknown disease, most likely imported from Bolivia. The
malady attacks cacti in particular, progresses latently for
some time, and then manifests itself as rot in the roots,
neck and body. Inasmuch as it appears that this disease is
highly infectious and is spread rapidly by heretofore
unidentified microspores, the Holben Collection is closed
to the public.
“After maybe ten days — during those ten days we had
to hide out so that cactus-lovers didn’t deluge us with
questions — I sent the newspapers another bulletin:
213
Can the Holben Collection Be Saved?
We have learned that Professor Mackenzie of Kew Gardens
has diagnosed the disease that broke out in the
world-famous Holben Collection as a strange tropical
mildew (Malacorrhiza paraguayensis Wild.) and recommends
spraying afflicted specimens with the Harvard-
Lotsen tincture. To date, experiments with this remedy,
which is being applied on a grand scale in the Holben
Collection, have been highly successful. The Harvard-
Lotsen solution is carried here by the such-and-such shop.
“By the time this came out, an undercover policeman
was already seated in the shop, and I had settled down by
the telephone. Two hours later the policeman telephoned me,
‘Mr. Holan, we’ve got him.’ Ten minutes later I was holding
a young man by the collar and shaking him.
“‘But, sir,’ the young man protested, ‘what are you
shaking me for? I only came here to buy some of that
famous Harvard-Lotsen tincture — ‘
“‘I know,’ I told him, ‘but there isn’t any, just like there
isn’t any new disease. But you’re the one who went pilfering
cacti from the Holben Collection, you little devil!’
“‘So there isn’t any new disease?’ the young man burst
out. ‘Thank God! I haven’t slept for ten nights for fear that
the rest of my cacti would catch it!’
“Well, I hauled him to the car by the collar and went
with him and the policeman to his apartment. Listen, I never
saw a collection like that in all my life. This young man had
a cubbyhole up in an attic in Vysocany that couldn’t have
been more than twelve feet square, with a blanket and a
little table and chair in the corner, and the rest of it was
nothing but cacti. But as to the kinds of specimens he had
and the shape they were in, the man had no match.
“‘So which of these did you pilfer,’ says the policeman;
and I’m looking at this young hooligan, how he’s shaking
and gulping down tears. ‘Listen,’ I told the policeman, ‘this
isn’t worth as much as we thought. Go tell your boss that
214
this young man’s fined fifty crowns and that I’ll cover for it
myself.’
“When the policeman had left, I said, ‘Well, young
friend, pack up everything of ours you took.’ He’s blinking
hard because he’s so close to tears, and he asks, ‘Please, sir,
couldn’t I just serve time instead?’
“‘Nothing doing,’ I yell at him. ‘First you have to
return everything you took.’ So he started picking up one
little pot after another and setting them to one side. There
were probably eighty of them — we didn’t have any idea we
were missing so many, but my guess is he’d been collecting
them all summer long. Just to be on the safe side, I shouted,
‘What, that’s all you took?’
“At that point the tears burst out. Then he picks up still
one more nice little white De Laitii and a corniger, puts
them with the rest, and sobs, ‘Sir, none of the rest are yours,
I swear it.’
“‘That remains to be seen,’ I stormed, ‘but right now
you’re going to tell me how you carted them away.’
“‘It was like this,’ he gabbled, and meanwhile his
Adam’s apple was jumping up and down. ‘I . . . what I
mean is, I put on these clothes . . . ’
“‘What kind of clothes?’ I shout. At that he turns red in
total embarrassment and stammers, ‘Women’s clothes, sir.’
“‘Young man,’ I said in amazement, ‘why women’s
clothes?’
“‘Because,’ he choked out, ‘because, sir, nobody pays
any attention to old ladies, and, well,’ he added, almost in
triumph, ‘it stands to reason that nobody’d ever be suspicious
of an old lady! Sir, women have every known passion,
but they don’t have a passion for collecting! Did you ever
know a woman who had a collection of stamps or beetles or
incunabula or anything like that? Never, sir! Women don’t
have that kind of meticulousness or — or — zeal. Women
are so terribly down-to-earth, sir! You know, that’s the
biggest difference between us and them: we’re the only ones
215
who go in for collections. What I think is, the universe is
only a collection of stars. There’s some kind of male god,
and he has this collection of worlds, and that’s why there’s
such a vast number of them. Darn it, if only I had as much
room and resources as he does! You know that I think up
new kinds of cacti? And in the night I dream about them: a
cactus with golden hair and deep blue flowers, maybe — I’d
name it Cephalocereus nympha aurea Racek — that’s my
name, Racek, you’ll be pleased to know. Or Mamillaria
colubrina Racek, or Astrophytum caespitosum Racek — oh,
sir, there are such wonderful possibilities! If you only knew
— ’
“‘Hold it,’ I interrupted him, ‘just where did you hide
those cacti?’
“‘In my bosom, sir,’ he said bashfully. ‘They prickle so
deliciously.’
“Listen, I didn’t have the heart to take those cacti from
him. ‘You know what,’ I told him, ‘I’m taking you to see old
Mr. Holben and he’ll give your ears a twist.’ Well, let me
tell you, friends, when those two got together they stayed
out there in the greenhouses all night long, walking around
those thirty-six thousand little pots. ‘Holan,’ the old gentleman
told me, ‘this is the first man I’ve met who really
knows the value of cacti.’ And before the month was out,
old Mr. Holben, with tears and his blessing, sent Racek off
to Mexico so he could collect cacti there. Both of them
believed by all that was holy that somewhere in Mexico
there was a Cephalocereus nympha aurea Racek. About a
year later we heard a strange rumor that Racek had died a
beautiful death, a martyr’s death. He’d gone to see some
Indians there in connection with their sacred cactus Chikuli
— which, in case you didn’t know, is the natural brother of
God the Father — and either he didn’t bow down to him or
he just plain stole it. To make a long story short, the dear
old Indians simply trussed up Mr. Racek and sat him down
on an Echinocactus visnaga Hooker, which is as big as an
216
elephant and dotted with spikes as long as Russian bayonets,
in consequence of which our countryman, surrendering to
his destiny, breathed his last. And that’s how the cactus thief
came to his end.”
217
The Old Jailbird’s Tale
“That’s nothing,” said Mr. Jandera, the writer. “Hunting
down a thief, that we know. What’s strange is when a thief
is trying to track down whomever it is he stole from. That’s
what happened to me, you know. The other day I wrote a
story and sent it off to the printer. And after it came out and
I read it over, an unpleasant feeling came over me that I’d
read something like it before somewhere. Damn and double
damn, Jandera, I said to myself, who did you steal this
material from? For three days I wandered around like a
sheep with the staggers, but I simply couldn’t figure out
from whom I had, as the saying goes, borrowed my material.
Finally I ran across an old friend and said, ‘You know, I
have the sense that everything about my last story was
stolen from somebody else.’ ‘But I knew that at first glance,’
said my friend, ‘you stole it from Chekhov.’ That took a
load off my mind at once, and when later I was talking with
a critic friend of mine, I said to him, ‘You won’t believe this,
but sometimes a person can commit plagiarism and not even
realize it. For instance, I stole my latest story.’ ‘I know,’ the
critic replied,’ it’s from Maupassant.’ So I made the circuit
of all my close friends; listen, once you step on the downward
path of crime, you don’t know when to turn back. Just
imagine, I’d stolen that very same story from Gottfried
Keller, Dickens, d’Annunzio, A Thousand and One Nights,
Charles-Louis Philippe, Hamsun, Storm, Hardy, Andrejev,
Bandello, Rosegger, Reymont, and a whole string of others.
It just goes to show how a person falls deeper and deeper
into the ways of wickedness.”
218
* * *
“That’s nothing,” said Mr. Bobek, the old jailbird, clearing
his throat. “It reminds me of this one case where they had a
murderer but couldn’t find a murder to match him up with.
I don’t want you thinking I was the one who did it; it’s just
that I was lodged for half a year in the same jail where the
murderer used to be. It was in Palermo,” Mr. Bobek explained,
and he added modestly, “I was only there on account
of this suitcase that fell into my hands when I was
coming by ship from Naples. It was the head guard in that
place who told me about this case with the murderer. What I
mean is, I taught him how to play some of our card games
like francefus, cruciform-marias, and godbless, what you
might call friendly games of chance. What I mean is, he was
a very religious man, that guard.
“Anyway, one night these two cops — they always
patrol by twos in Italy — these two cops see this fellow
racing full speed down the via Butera, which runs right into
the stinking harbor. So they nab him, and porco dio, he has
this dagger in his hand, dripping blood. Of course they take
him to the station, and then it’s, all right, tell us who you
sliced up. The boy breaks into tears and says, ‘I murdered a
man, but I can’t tell you any more. If I told you any more,
some other people would be in big trouble.’ And they didn’t
get any more out of him.
“Of course, right away they start looking for a corpse,
but they can’t find one. So they order an inspection of all
the dear departed who’d been reported dead at the time; but
it turns out they’d all died like Christians, of malaria and
things like that. So they go to work on the boy again. He
says his name is Marco Biagio from Castrogiovanni and he’s
a journeyman cabinet-maker. He also says he slashed some
Christian maybe twenty times and killed him. But who he
did it to, he’s not telling, because he’s not making any
trouble for those other people. And that was that. The only
219
other thing he did was call down God’s punishment on
himself and bang his head on the floor. Never in all their
born days, said the guard, had they ever seen such remorse.
“You know, cops never believe anybody or anything
they say. They figured this Marco probably didn’t butcher
anybody and was lying through his teeth. So they sent the
dagger off to the university, and there they said that the
blood on the blade came from a human being and that this
person had to have been stabbed in the heart. Don’t ask
how they could tell, because I don’t know. But anyway, what
were the police supposed to do now? They had a murderer
but no murder. And that’s no good, hauling somebody into
court for an unknown murder; you have to have a corpus
delicti, you know. Meanwhile this Marco just kept on
praying and muttering to himself and begging them to turn
him over to the court so he could pay for his mortal sin.
‘You porco,’ they told him, ‘if you want to be sentenced you
have to confess who it was you butchered. At least give us
the name of a witness, you goddamn mule.’ ‘I myself am the
witness,’ bawled Marco, ‘and I swear I murdered a man!’
Well, that’s how it was.
“That guard told me how this Marco was truly a fine
and worthy person and how they’d never had such a highprincipled
murderer there. He couldn’t read, but he always
had a Bible in his hands, even if it was upside-down sometimes,
and he was always blubbering into it. So they sent
him to this kindhearted soul of a priest so he could shore
him up spiritually and, while he was at it, question him on
the sly about the who and why of the murder. The priest
came away from Marco wiping his eyes. He said that even if
Marco had gone bad somehow, he had surely attained a
state of grace and his soul thirsted for justice. But apart
from all the talk and tears, they didn’t get any more out of
the priest, either. ‘Let them hang me and get it over with,’
said Marco, ‘then I’ll have paid for my terrible crime. There
must be justice.’ Well, it went on that way for more than
220
half a year, and they never found a suitable corpse.
“Since it was already making him look pretty silly, the
chief of police said, ‘Mordiano, if this Marco wants to hang
come hell or high water, let’s give him this murder that took
place in Arenello three days after he was brought in, where
they found the old lady who was all slashed up. It’s a
disgrace that here we have a murderer with no murder and
no corpse, and there we’ve got a nice, verifiable murder with
no perpetrator. Work it out somehow. Since Marco wants to
be convicted for a murder, this one can be his. We can
compensate him for any number of sins if he confesses to
the old lady.’ So they proposed the idea to Marco and
promised him he’d get the rope in no time and finally be at
peace. Marco wavered for a minute and then declared, ‘No,
since my soul is already damned for the crime of murder,
then I’m not burdening myself with still more mortal sins
like lying, deception, and bearing false witness.’ That’s what
he was like, gentlemen, a fair and just man.
“Well, it didn’t go on much longer. At the jail, all they
could think of now was how to get that damned Marco off
their hands. ‘Tell you what,’ they said to his guard, ‘do
something, anything, so he can make a run for it. We can’t
send him to court because we’d only lose our credibility, and
to release him when he’s already confessed to murder won’t
do, either. Look, be discreet, but see to it that this dio cane
maledetto somehow disappears.’ Listen, from then on they
sent Marco out all by himself to get pepper and thread and
so on. His cell was left wide open night and day, and Marco
ran around to churches and holy shrines all day long. And
in the evening, if you can believe it, he’d rush back again
with his tongue hanging out, to make sure they wouldn’t
shut the prison gate in his face at eight o’clock. Once they
locked up early on purpose, and he kicked up such a racket
and pounded so hard on the gate, they had to open it for
him and let him go back to his cell.
“Finally, one evening, the guard said to Marco, ‘You
221
porca madonna, you better believe this is your last night
here. Since you won’t confess who you butchered, you tricky
bandito, we’re throwing you out. You can go to hell and let
the devil punish you.’ That night Marco hanged himself
from the window in his cell.
“Listen, no doubt the priest had told him that when
somebody commits suicide out of remorse he can be saved in
spite of this mortal sin, because he died in a state of active
repentance. My guess is the priest didn’t know this for sure,
or maybe it’s still open to question. But what you can
believe is that Marco haunted that cell. What I mean is, it
was like this: whenever they locked somebody up in that
cell, his conscience would begin to trouble him and he’d
start regretting his criminal deeds, make penance, and get
one-hundred percent converted. Of course, it took different
periods of time for different kinds of crimes: for a misdemeanor
it would be overnight, for a felony two or three
days, and for a capital crime it would take maybe three
weeks before the prisoner was converted. The ones who held
out the longest were safecrackers, embezzlers and, on the
whole, anybody else who made off with really big money;
I’m telling you, big money hardens the heart more than
anything else, somehow, or at least it clogs up the conscience.
It was always most effective of all on the anniversary
of Marco’s death. Well, they transformed that cell in
Palermo into something like a reformatory, if you get my
meaning. They locked prisoners in there so they’d repent of
their crimes and get religion. You know, some criminals have
a lot of pull with the police, and the cops in turn make good
use of some of those chiselers, so needless to say, they didn’t
lock everybody in there, and every now and then there’d be
somebody they wouldn’t even try to save. I also think that
sometimes they let some of those big crooks grease a few
palms so as not to get thrown into that wonder-working cell.
There’s not a lot of honesty even in miracles.
“That’s what the head guard in Palermo told me,
222
gentlemen, and his buddies there swore it was true. There
was an English sailor in there once on account of some freefor-
all, Briggs by name, and he went straight from that cell
to Formosa to be a missionary. I heard later he met a true
martyr’s death there. It was strange how no guard would
even stick a finger in Marco’s cell; probably they were afraid
they’d fall into a state of grace and start repenting of their
own deeds.
“So anyway, like I told you, I was teaching this head
guard how to play some of our more religious-type card
games. You wouldn’t believe how angry that man got when
he lost! But once, when a few too many bad cards happened
to fall his way, he shut me up in Marco’s cell. ‘Per Bacco,’
he yelled, ‘I’ll learn you!’ I just lay down and went to sleep,
of course. Next morning he calls me in and says, ‘How
about it, are you saved?’ ‘Damned if I know, signore
comandante,’ says I, ‘I slept like a stork.’ ‘Then you can
march right back in there,’ he yells. — But what I meant to
tell you a while back is, I spent three weeks in that cell and
nothing came over me at all: no remorse, no nothing. And at
that point the guard begins shaking his head in amazement
and says, ‘You Czechs must be terrible heathens or heretics,
if it doesn’t have any effect on you!’ And then he swore at
me something awful.
“And you know, from that time on Marco’s cell stopped
having any effect at all. No matter who they shoved in
there, nobody ever again got converted or turned over a new
leaf or even repented — flat-out nothing at all. The long and
the short of it is, that cell went out of business. My God,
they raised a stink about it! They complained to the board
of directors that I’d interfered with procedure and what have
you. I just shrugged my shoulders. There wasn’t anything I
could do about it, right? Well, they gave me three days in
the black hole anyway, because, they said, I’d wrecked their
cell.”
223
The Disappearance of Mr. Hirsch
“That was a pretty good case,” said Mr Taussig, “but it has
one great fault: it didn’t take place in Prague. You know,
even in criminal matters a man should have a little consideration
for his hometown. What do we care about some crime
in Palermo or some damned place like that? What good is it
to us? But when one of your better crimes gets pulled off in
Prague, well, to me that’s downright flattering. I tell myself
that everybody in the whole world’s talking about us now;
it’s kind of, you know, gratifying. Then, too, it stands to
reason that wherever a really first-rate crime takes place,
business goes up. It’s thought to be a sign of very favorable
prospects, you see, and it inspires confidence. But the culprit
has to be caught.
“I don’t know if you remember that case in Dlouha
Street that had to do with old Hirsch. He had a shop there
dealing in hides, but he also sold Persian carpets, too, and
other things from the Orient. You know, for many years he
had some kind of racket in Constantinople — but he picked
up some sort of liver trouble there; that’s why he was
scrawny as a dead cat, and brown like he’d been dragged
out of a tanning vat. And these rug- dealers from Armenia
or Smyrna used to come see him here because he knew how
to talk with them in their thieves’ lingo. They’re a bunch of
crooks, those Armenians; even a Jew needs to keep a sharp
eye on them. Anyway, this Hirsch had the hides on the
ground floor, and from there a stairway wound up to his
office. Directly behind the office was his apartment, and
that’s where Mrs. Hirsch sat; she was so fat she couldn’t
even walk.
224
“Well, one day towards noon one of the shop assistants
came up to the office looking for Mr. Hirsch, to see if they
were to send some hides on credit to a man named Weil in
Brno; but Mr. Hirsch wasn’t in the office. True, this was
kind of unusual, but the assistant told himself that Mr.
Hirsch must have just popped over to see Mrs. Hirsch in
their apartment next door. But pretty soon the maid came
downstairs and said that Mr. Hirsch was supposed to come
up for lunch. ‘What do you mean, come up for lunch?’ the
assistant said. ‘Mr. Hirsch’s already in the apartment, isn’t
he?’ ‘How could he be?’ the maid answered, ‘Mrs. Hirsch’s
been sitting there all day right next to the office and she
hasn’t seen him since this morning.’ ‘And we,’ said the
assistant, ‘haven’t seen him either, have we, Vaclav?’ — That
was the errand-boy’s name. ‘I took the mail up to him at
ten,’ the assistant went on, ‘and Mr. Hirsch chewed me out
because we were supposed to have written Lemberger about
those calfskins, and from that time on he never stuck his
nose outside the office.’ ‘My stars,’ said the maid, ‘he’s not
in the office now. Maybe he had to go somewhere in town?’
‘Well, he didn’t go out through the shop,’ the assistant said,
‘or we would have seen him for sure. Maybe he went out
through the apartment.’ ‘That’s not possible,’ said the maid,
‘because Mrs. Hirsch would of seen him.’ ‘Wait a minute,’
the assistant said, ‘when I saw him, he had his robe and
slippers on. Go see if he took his shoes, galoshes, and
overcoat’ — it was November, you know, and it had been
raining a lot. ‘If he got dressed,’ the assistant added, ‘then
he went into town somewhere. If not, then he has to be
somewhere here, doesn’t he?’
“So the maid scooted back upstairs, but in a few
minutes she was back again, all upset. ‘Oh my stars, Mr.
Hugo,’ she said to the assistant, ‘Mr. Hirsch didn’t take his
shoes or anything; and Mrs. Hirsch says that he couldn’t of
gone through the apartment, because he would of had to go
through her room!’ ‘He didn’t go out through the shop,
225
either,’ said the assistant. ‘He wasn’t in the shop at all today,
he only called me into the office because of the mail. Vaclav,
go look for him!’ So first they dashed up to the office.
Everything was in place there, except for a couple of carpets
rolled up in a corner and a letter to Lemberger, still unsigned,
on the desk; and the gas lamp over the desk was still
glowing. ‘Well, it’s clear that Mr. Hirsch didn’t go anywhere,’
said Hugo, ‘because if he’d gone anywhere, he’d
have turned off the lamp, right? He must be somewhere in
the apartment.’ So they searched the whole apartment, but
to no avail. At this, Mrs. Hirsch began crying her heart out
in her armchair; it looked, this Hugo said later, like a huge
mountain of jelly quivering there. ‘Mrs. Hirsch,’ this Hugo
said — it’s remarkable how a young Jew suddenly comes to
his senses when he needs to — ‘don’t cry, Mrs. Hirsch; Mr.
Hirsch didn’t run off anywhere. Hides are selling well now,
and besides, he doesn’t have any debts. The boss must be
here somewhere. If we don’t find him by evening, we’ll tell
the police about it, but not until then; because as you know,
Mrs. Hirsch, something conspicuous like this isn’t good for
business.’
“Well, they searched and waited until evening, but there
was no trace of Mr. Hirsch. So after Mr. Hugo closed the
shop at the usual hour, he went to notify the police that Mr.
Hirsch was missing, and detectives were sent over from
headquarters. As you can imagine, they rummaged through
everything, but they didn’t find even the littlest clue. They
even looked for blood on the floor, but to no avail; so for
the time being they sealed up the office. On top of that, they
cross-examined Mrs. Hirsch and the staff about what had
happened that morning. But nobody had seen anything
unusual, except that Mr. Hugo remembered that shortly after
ten o’clock Mr. Lebeda, a traveling salesman, had dropped
in to see Mr. Hirsch and talked with him for about ten
minutes. So then they went looking for Mr. Lebeda, and
needless to say they found him playing poker at the Bristol
226
Café. Well, this Lebeda straightaway hid the stakes, but the
detective says to him, ‘Mr. Lebeda, we’re not here about
gambling today, we’re here about Mr. Hirsch: he’s missing,
and you were the last one to see him.’ But it turns out that
this Lebeda didn’t really know anything, either; he’d been to
see Mr. Hirsch about some leather harness and he hadn’t
noticed anything out of the ordinary, except it seemed to
him that Mr. Hirsch looked even more poorly than usual.
‘You look more or less like you’re wasting away, Mr.
Hirsch,’ he’d told him. ‘But Mr. Lebeda,’ the detective said,
‘even if Mr. Hirsch had dried up even more, he couldn’t
have vanished into thin air. He’d still have left some bones
or dentures behind, right? And you couldn’t have carried
him out of there in your briefcase.’
“But wait, here’s where the case takes another turn. You
know how they have checkrooms at train stations where
travelers can leave their suitcases and things. Well, about
two days after Mr. Hirsch disappeared, the checkroom
attendant told the porter that there was a trunk in there that
looked just a bit suspicious to her. ‘I don’t know why,’ she
said, ‘but that trunk just plain scares me.’ So the porter goes
over and sniffs at the trunk and says, ‘You know, ma, maybe
you’d better report this to the railway police.’ So the railway
police fetched a police dog, and when the dog sniffed at the
suitcase he began to snarl and his coat bristled up. It was all
pretty strange by now, and so they broke into the trunk; and
squeezed up inside it was the corpse of Mr. Hirsch in his
robe and slippers. And because he had that liver ailment, the
poor man, he was already smelling something awful. And
there was a heavy cord cutting right into his neck; he’d been
strangled. But strangest of all was how he could’ve got out
of his office in his robe and slippers and into a trunk at the
railway station.
“It was Captain Mejzlik who got the case. He looks
over the corpse pretty carefully, and right away he sees these
tiny green, blue, and red specks on the face and hands.
227
What made it so odd, see, is that Mr. Hirsch himself was so
brown. This is a strange form of decomposition, Mejzlik
said to himself, and he began to rub at one of the specks
with his handkerchief; and the speck came right off. ‘Take a
look at this,’ he said to the other detectives. ‘It seems to be
some sort of aniline dye. I’ll want to take another look at
that office.’
“To begin with, he looked around the office for any
kinds of dyes, but there weren’t any. Then suddenly his eyes
lit on the rolls of Persian carpets. He unrolled one of them,
spit on his handkerchief, and rubbed at the blue in the
pattern; and this blue stain appeared on his handkerchief.
‘Damned shoddy goods, these carpets,’ Mejzlik said, and
then he went on looking. On Mr. Hirsch’s desk, in the
inkstand, he found the butts of two or three Turkish cigarettes.
‘Keep in mind,’ he said to one of the detectives, ‘that
in this Persian carpet racket they invariably smoke one
cigarette after another. It’s one of their Oriental customs.’
And then he sent for Mr. Hugo. ‘Mr. Hugo,’ he said, ‘there
was somebody else here after Mr. Lebeda, wasn’t there?’
“‘There was,’ said Mr. Hugo, ‘but Mr. Hirsch never
wanted us to talk about it. You look after the hides, he’d tell
us, but stay away from the carpets; that’s my concern, not
yours.’
“‘I can believe it,’ said Mejzlik, ‘because these are
contraband carpets. Look, not one of them has a customs
stamp. If Mr. Hirsch wasn’t with his maker now, he’d be in
big trouble with the customs office. He’d be paying fines
until he was blue in the face. Out with it, quick: who was
here?’
“‘Well,’ said Mr. Hugo, ‘about ten-thirty this Armenian,
or maybe he was a Jew, drove up in a big open car, he was
fat and kind of yellowish, and he asked in Turkish or something
for Mr. Hirsch. So I showed him the way up to the
office. And right behind him came this tall, lanky fellow, a
servant or something, thin as a rail and black as a black cat,
228
and he was carrying these five big carpets rolled up on his
shoulder; Vaclav and I were trying to figure out how he did
it. Anyway, the two of them went into the office and were
there for maybe fifteen minutes. We didn’t think anything
about it, but you could hear that swindler talking to Mr.
Hirsch the whole time. Then the servant came back downstairs
again, but this time he was only carrying four carpets
rolled up on his shoulder. Aha, I said to myself, Mr. Hirsch’s
bought himself another carpet. Oh yes, and this Armenian
turned back at the office door and said something else to
Mr. Hirsch, who was still in the office, but I couldn’t understand
what he was saying. And then the lanky fellow threw
the carpets in the car, and off they went. The only reason I
didn’t mention it is because it wasn’t anything out of the
ordinary, that’s all,’ said Mr. Hugo. ‘We get these rug dealers
in here all the time, and they’re all a bunch of thieves.’
“‘Mr. Hugo,’ said Mejzlik, ‘you might as well know
that there was indeed something odd going on. What that
lanky fellow was carrying out in one of those rolled-up
carpets was Mr. Hirsch’s corpse. Damn it, man, you might
have noticed that that fellow came down with a heavier load
than he took up!’
“‘True,’ said Mr. Hugo, turning pale, ‘he was all
stooped over! But sir, that can’t be right; that fat Armenian
was right in back of him and still talking to Mr. Hirsch
through the doorway!’
“‘Sure,’ said Mejzlik, ‘he was talking to an empty office.
And earlier, while the lanky fellow was strangling Mr.
Hirsch, that other man kept right on jabbering. Mr. Hugo,
that Armenian Jew is cleverer than you. Afterwards, then,
they took Mr. Hirsch’s body in the rolled-up carpet to their
hotel; but because it was raining, the cheap carpet dye
rubbed off on Mr. Hirsch. It’s clear as crystal, no doubt
about it. And at the hotel they put Mr. Hirsch’s bodily
remains in a trunk and sent the trunk to the train station.
There you have it, Mr. Hugo!’
229
“Well, while Mejzlik was doing all this, his detectives
had already found a clue to the Armenian’s identity. What I
mean is, there was a luggage sticker from a Berlin hotel on
the trunk — which proved that the Armenian was a big
tipper. Hotel porters all over the world, you know, use those
stickers as a sign that the owner’s pretty free with his
money. And because this Armenian paid well, the porter in
Berlin probably remembered him well. His name was
Mazanian, and he was probably on his way through Prague
to Vienna; but they didn’t nail him until he reached
Bucharest, and that’s where he hanged himself when they
took him into custody. Why he murdered Mr. Hirsch, nobody
knows. Most likely they had some quarrel from the
time when Mr. Hirsch had his business in Constantinople.
“But what this story just goes to show,” Mr. Taussig
ended thoughtfully, “is that the chief thing in business is
quality. If that Armenian had been smuggling quality carpets
instead of ones made with cheap dye, they couldn’t have
figured out so soon how he’d finished off Mr. Hirsch, and
that’s a fact. Sell shoddy goods, though, and sooner or later
you pay for it.”
230
Chintamani and Birds
“Hm,” said Dr. Vitasek, “as a matter of fact I happen to
know a bit about Persian carpets myself. But I also have to
tell you, Mr. Taussig, that things nowadays aren’t at all the
way they used to be. Nowadays those rascals in the Orient
won’t take the trouble to dye the wool with cochineal,
indigo, saffron, camel’s urine, oak-gall, or the rest of those
fine old organic dyes. The wool isn’t what it used to be,
either, and when it comes to patterns — I could weep! I
suppose Persian carpets are one of the lost arts now. That’s
why only the old pieces that were made before 1870 have
any value today; but the only way you can buy them is
when some old family sells its heirlooms ‘for family reasons,’
as the better families say when they mean debts. Listen, once
I came across a genuine Transylvanian carpet in the
Rozmberk castle — one of those small prayer-rugs that the
Turks turned out in the seventeenth century when they were
living in Transylvania. The tourists visiting the castle stomp
back and forth on it in their hob-nailed boots, and nobody
has any idea of its value — it’s enough to break your heart.
And one of the rarest carpets in the world is right here in
Prague, and nobody knows about it.
“What I mean is this: I’ve come to know all the carpet
dealers in the city, and every so often I make the rounds to
see what they’ve got in stock. You see, sometimes the agents
in Anatolia and Persia still come across an old specimen
that’s been stolen from a mosque or someplace, and they
wrap it up with a lot of other dry goods; then the whole
bundle, regardless of what’s inside, is sold by weight. And I
think to myself, just suppose they were to wrap up a Ladik
231
or a Bergama that way! That’s why I drop in on this or that
rug dealer from time to time, sit down on a pile of carpets,
puff on my pipe, and watch them selling Bukhara, Saruk,
and Tabriz carpets to half-wits; and occasionally I’ll say,
‘What’s that one you’ve got underneath, that yellow one?’
And what do you know, it’s a Hamadan. Well, every once in
a while I stop by to see Mrs. Severynova — she has a little
shop in a courtyard in the Old Town, and sometimes you
can find some nice Karamans and Kilims there. She’s a
plump, jolly lady who can talk your ear off, and she has a
poodle who’s so fat that it almost makes you sick to look at
it. It’s one of those fat, bad-tempered dogs with an irritating,
asthmatic bark; I don’t like them. Listen, has any of you
ever seen a young poodle? I haven’t. If you ask me, all
poodles are old, just like inspectors, auditors, and tax
collectors; I suppose it’s the nature of the breed. But because
I wanted to keep on good terms with Mrs. Severynova, I
would always sit in the corner where the bitch Amina snored
and wheezed away on a large carpet that had been folded in
a square, and I would scratch her back. Amina liked that no
end.
“‘Mrs. Severynova,’ I said to her one day, ‘business
must be bad. This carpet I’m sitting on has been here for
three years now.’
“‘It’s been here longer than that,’ said Mrs. Severynova;
‘it’s been folded up in that corner for a good ten years, but
it isn’t my carpet.’
“‘Aha,’ said I, ‘it’s Amina’s.’
“‘Not at all,’ said Mrs. Severynova, laughing. ‘It belongs
to a certain lady who says she doesn’t have enough
room for it at home, so she leaves it here. It gets in my way,
but at least Amina can sleep on it, can’t you, Amina?’
“Although I pulled aside only a tiny corner of the
carpet, Amina started to growl ferociously. ‘Why, this is
quite an old carpet,’ I said, ‘may I take a look at it?’
“‘Why not?’ said Mrs. Severynova, and she took Amina
232
onto her lap. ‘Come now, Amina, the gentleman’s only going
to have a look, and then he’ll fold it up again for you. Now
shush, Amina, there’s no need to growl! That’s enough, you
silly dog!’
“Meanwhile I had spread out the carpet and, let me tell
you, my heart nearly stopped. It was a seventeenth-century
Anatolian, a bit threadbare in places, but just so you’ll
know, it was what they call a bird carpet, in a Chintamani
pattern with birds; in other words, a sacred and forbidden
pattern. You can take my word for it, it’s extremely rare;
and this particular specimen measured at least five by six
yards, in a beautiful white with turquoise blue and cherry
pink . . . I turned to the window so that Mrs. Severynova
couldn’t see the expression on my face and said, ‘It’s certainly
seen better days, Mrs. Severynova, but it’ll fall to
pieces altogether just lying here in your shop. Look, tell the
lady I’ll buy it, since she doesn’t have room for it herself.’
“‘Easier said than done,’ said Mrs. Severynova. ‘That
carpet isn’t for sale, and the lady herself is always off in spa
towns like Merano and Nice. I don’t even know when she’s
back in town. But I’ll try to ask her.’
“‘Yes, please do,’ I said with as much indifference as I
could, and I went on my way. You need to understand that,
for a collector, it’s a matter of honor to pick up some rarity
for a song. I know a very rich and important man who
collects books. He doesn’t mind in the least paying a couple
of thousand, if need be, for some old second-hand book; but
when he picks up a first edition of Josef Krasoslav
Chmelensky’s poems for a few cents at a flea market, he
nearly jumps for joy. It’s a kind of sport, like hunting chamois.
So I had made up my mind that I was going to get this
carpet on the cheap and then present it to the museum,
because a museum’s the only place for something like that.
Only there’d have to be a label on it saying: Gift of Dr.
Vitasek. Well, we all have our own private fantasies, don’t
we? But I must confess that my brain was on fire.
233
“It was all I could do not to run back the very next day
for that specimen with the Chintamani and birds. I could
think of nothing else. Every day I told myself to hold off
just one day longer; I did it to spite myself. Sometimes we
enjoy tormenting ourselves. After a couple of weeks, however,
it struck me that somebody else might come across that
bird carpet, so I raced to Mrs. Severynova’s. ‘What about
it?’ I gasped from the doorway.
“‘What about what?’ Mrs. Severynova asked in astonishment,
and I tried to pull myself together. ‘Why,’ I said, ‘I
was just walking along the street here and suddenly remembered
that white carpet. Will the lady sell it?’
“Mrs. Severynova shook her head. ‘It can’t be done,’
she said, ‘she’s at Biarritz now and nobody knows when
she’s coming back.’ So I looked to see if the carpet was
there. Amina was lying on it, of course, fatter and mangier
than ever and waiting for me to scratch her back.
“A few days later I had to go to London, and while I
was there I took the opportunity to call on Sir Douglas
Keith — he’s the greatest living authority on Oriental carpets,
you know. ‘Could you by any chance tell me, sir,’ I
asked him, ‘the value of a white Anatolian with Chintamani
and birds, more than thirty yards square?’
“Sir Douglas stared at me over his glasses and snapped
almost savagely, ‘None at all!’
“‘What do you mean, none at all?’ I said, taken aback.
‘Why wouldn’t it have any value?’
“‘Because no carpet of that size and pattern exists,’ Sir
Douglas shouted at me. ‘You ought to realize that the largest
carpet with Chintamani and birds that I have ever known
barely measures fifteen square yards.’
“My face flushed red with joy. ‘But supposing,’ I said to
him, ‘that there were a specimen as big as that. What value
would it have?’
“‘Just what I’ve told you, none at all!’ shouted Sir
Douglas. ‘A specimen like that would be unique, and how in
234
heaven’s name do you determine the value of a unique
specimen? If a specimen’s unique, it could just as easily be
worth a thousand pounds as ten thousand pounds. How the
dickens would I know? Anyway, no such carpet exists, sir.
Good day, sir.’
“Well, you can imagine my state of mind when I returned:
My God, I’ve got to get my hands on that specimen
with the Chintamani and birds! What a windfall for the
museum! But keep in mind, please, that I couldn’t express
any interest whatsoever in the carpet, because that’s not how
a collector goes about it. And don’t forget that Mrs.
Severynova had no particular interest in selling that tattered
old rag that her Amina lolled around on, while that cursed
woman who owned the carpet was gadding about from
Merano to Ostend and from Baden to Vichy — that woman
must have had a medical encyclopedia at home, she had so
many disorders. At any rate, she was forever in one spa
town or another. So every couple of weeks I would drop in
on Mrs. Severynova to see whether the rug with all its birds
was still sitting there in the corner. I would scratch the
repulsive Amina till she squealed with delight and, so as not
to make it too obvious, I would invariably buy a carpet of
some sort. Listen, I’ve got so many Shiraz, Shirvan, Mosul,
Kabistan, and other garden-variety carpets at home, piles
and piles of them — but among them is a classic Derbent,
friends, you don’t see those every day, and an old blue
Khorasan. But what I went through for two whole years,
only a collector could understand. Talk about the torments
of love, why, that’s nothing compared to the torments of
collecting. Still and all, no collector’s yet been known to
commit suicide. On the contrary, they usually live to a ripe
old age. It must be a healthy passion.
“One day Mrs. Severynova suddenly said, ‘Well, Mrs.
Zanelli, the woman that carpet belongs to, was here. I told
her I could find a buyer for that white carpet of hers, and
anyway it’s getting worn to threads just lying around here.
235
But she said it was a family heirloom and she didn’t want to
sell it and I’m to leave it where it is.’
“Needless to say, I set out after this Mrs. Zanelli on my
own. I thought she’d be some kind of society fashion-plate,
but it turned out she was an ugly old witch with a purple
nose and a wig and a peculiar tic that kept jumping all the
way from her mouth to her left ear.
“‘Madame,’ I said, and I couldn’t help noticing how her
mouth danced around on her face, ‘I’d very much like to
buy that white carpet of yours. True, it’s a bit threadbare,
but it just might do for my . . . my entrance hall.’ And as I
waited for her answer, I felt as if my own mouth were
beginning to prance and twitch to the left. I don’t know
whether her tic was contagious or whether it was just
nervous excitement, but I couldn’t keep it under control.
“‘How dare you?’ the dreadful woman screeched at me.
‘Get out of here now, now, now,” she shrieked. “That’s the
heirloom rug mein Grosspapa left to me! If you don’t get
out, I’m calling the Polizei! I’m not selling any carpets, I’m a
von Zanelli, sir! Mary, see this man out of the house!’
“Believe me, I scrambled down those stairs like a
schoolboy. I could have wept with fury and regret, but what
good would that have done? After a year I dropped by Mrs.
Severynova’s again; in the meantime, Amina had become so
fat and bald that she’d acquired a grunt, just like a pig.
During that year Mrs. Zanelli had come back to town once
more, and this time I gave in and did something which, as a
collector, I’ll be ashamed of to my dying day: I sent a friend
of mine to her, Bimbal, the lawyer — he’s a refined fellow
and he has a beard, which of course gives women boundless
confidence in him — and I told him to offer the worthy lady
a reasonable sum for that bird carpet. Meanwhile, I waited
outside, jittery as a suitor who’s waiting for an answer.
Three hours later, Bimbal staggered out of the house wiping
the sweat from his face. ‘You scoundrel,’ he hissed at me, ‘I
ought to wring your neck. Why in God’s name should I for
236
your sake alone have to sit and listen for three whole hours
to the history of the Zanelli family? And let me tell you,’ he
added vindictively, ‘you’re not going to get that rug. Seventeen
Zanellis would turn in their graves if their family relic
ended up in a museum! Jesus, you sure pulled a fast one on
me!’ And with that he left.
“But you know, once a man gets an idea into his head,
he doesn’t let go in a hurry; and if he’s a collector, he won’t
stop at murder. Believe me, collecting is no job for sissies. So
I made up my mind to simply steal that carpet with the
Chintamani and birds. First I scouted out the lay of the
land. Mrs. Severynova’s shop is in a courtyard, and at nine
o’clock in the evening the outer gate to the passageway is
locked; but I didn’t want to use a skeleton key, because
that’s something I know nothing about. There are some
cellar stairs down from the passageway where a person
could hide before the gate is locked, and there’s also a small
shed in the courtyard. If you got up on the roof of the shed,
you could climb over into the next yard, which belongs to a
tavern — and you can always get out of a tavern. So it was
simple enough, and all that was left was to find a way to
open the shop window. I bought a glazier’s diamond for that
job and practiced on my own windows till I knew how to
remove a pane of glass.
“Please don’t think that burglary’s all that simple,
however; it’s much harder than operating on the prostate or
yanking out a kidney. In the first place, it’s hard to avoid
being seen. In the second place, there’s no end of waiting
around and other in- conveniences involved. And in the third
place, there’s all this uncertainty beforehand; you never
know what you’re going to run up against. Let me tell you,
it’s a tough, badly-paid line of work. If I found a burglar in
my house, I’d take him by the hand and gently say, ‘My
dear fellow, why do you want to put yourself to so much
trouble? Look, couldn’t you rob people in some more convenient
way?’
237
“I don’t know how other people steal, of course, but
my own experiences aren’t exactly encouraging. On the
evening in question, as they say, I snuck into the passageway
and hid on the stairs leading down to the cellar. That’s how
a police report would describe it; what really happened was
that I hung around for half an hour in the rain in front of
the passageway, which made me more or less conspicuous to
one and all. Finally, in desperation, I came to a decision, just
as you finally decide to have a tooth pulled, and I stepped
into the passageway. Needless to say, I collided with a
servant girl who’d gone to fetch beer from the tavern next
door. In order to calm her down, I muttered something to
the effect that she was a sweet thing or a darling girl or
whatever; it terrified her so, she took to her heels at once.
For the time being, I hid on those steps leading down to the
cellar. Some bastards had left a trash can standing there, full
of ashes and other slop, which fell over with a huge clatter
while I was engaged in my so-called sneaking around, and it
spilled over, mostly on me. Then the servant girl returned
with the beer and, still flustered, informed the caretaker that
a suspicious character was creeping around the place. But
that excellent man refused to trouble himself and declared
that it was probably some drunk who’d lost his way to the
tavern. A quarter of an hour later, yawning and clearing his
throat, he locked the gate and things quieted down. All I
could hear was the servant girl sobbing loudly and forlornly
somewhere upstairs — it’s odd how noisy servant girls are
when they cry; must be homesickness. I began to feel cold
and, besides that, the place smelled sour and musty. I groped
around, but everything I touched felt slimy. My God, what a
lot of prints must have been planted there by the fingers of
Dr. Vitasek, our distinguished specialist in diseases of the
urinary tract! When I thought it must surely be midnight, it
was only ten o’clock. I’d wanted to start my burgling at
midnight, but by eleven I couldn’t stand it any longer. So off
I went to steal. You wouldn’t believe the kind of racket a
238
person can make when trying to slink around in the dark,
but the building was blessed with sound sleepers. At last I
got to the window and, with a horrible screaking sound,
began to cut the glass. From inside came a muffled bark.
Jesus, Amina was in there!
“‘Amina,’ I whispered, ‘shut up, you ugly beast. I’ve
come to scratch your back.’ But in the dark, you know, it
was incredibly difficult to coax that diamond into the same
little slit I’d just made; so I scraped the diamond back and
forth over the pane, until I finally pressed just a bit harder
and the entire pane popped out with a crash. That does it,
now everybody will come running out, I said to myself, and
I peeked around for someplace to hide; but nothing happened.
Then, with an almost perverse calm, I pushed out a
few more panes of glass and opened the window. Inside,
Amina barked from time to time, but only half-heartedly
and as a matter of form, just to show that she was doing
her job. So I crawled through the window and headed
straight for that loathsome bitch. ‘Amina,’ I whispered
feverishly, ‘for heaven’s sake, where’s your back? There we
go, precious pooch, this gentleman’s your friend — you slut,
you like that, don’t you?’ Amina writhed with bliss, if a
giant gunnysack can be said to writhe. So I said, in a very
friendly way, ‘That’s right, now let go, doggie!’ and I started
to drag that priceless bird carpet out from under her. At this
point, Amina evidently told herself that her property was at
stake, and she began to howl. It wasn’t just a bark, it was a
howl. ‘Jesus, Amina,’ I quickly scolded her, ‘quiet, you bitch!
Wait, I’ll get you something even nicer to lie on!’ And whap!
I jerked a hideous, shiny Kerman off the wall that Mrs.
Severynova regarded as the best thing in her shop. ‘Look,
Amina,’ I whispered, ‘that’s where you’re going to go nightnight!’
Amina gazed at me with interest, but scarcely had I
stretched out my hand for her carpet than she started howling
again. I thought they must have heard her all the way to
Kobylisi. So once again I worked the monster up to a state
239
of ecstasy with an especially sensuous round of back-scratching,
and I took her in my arms. But the instant I reached for
that unique white specimen with the Chintamani and birds,
she gave an asthmatic rattle and began to swear. ‘Godammit,
beast,’ I said, at wits’ end, ‘I’ll have to kill you!’
“Listen, I have to admit that I myself don’t understand
it. I looked at that fat, vile, repulsive bitch with the most
savage hatred I have ever known, but I couldn’t bring myself
to kill the creature. I had a good knife, I had a belt holding
up my pants; I could have slit her throat or strangled her,
but I just didn’t have the heart to do it. I sat down beside
her on that divine carpet and scratched her behind the ears.
‘You coward,’ I whispered to myself, ‘one or two quick
movements is all it would take. You’ve operated on plenty of
people in your time, and you’ve seen them die in terror and
pain. Why can’t you kill a dog?’ I actually gritted my teeth
to try and pluck up the courage, but I couldn’t do it.
And at that point, I have to tell you, I broke down and
cried — I suppose it must have been because I felt so
ashamed of myself. And then Amina began to whine and
lick my face.
“‘You lousy, miserable, good-for-nothing beast,’ I
grumbled, and then I patted her mangy back and crawled
through the window back into the courtyard. It was simply
defeat and retreat. Well, what I intended to do next was
jump onto the shed and go across the roof to the other
courtyard and out through the tavern, but either I’d used up
every last smidgen of strength or the roof was higher than
I’d estimated. In any event, I couldn’t get up there. So I
climbed back down the cellar stairs again and stayed there
till morning, half-dead with exhaustion. Idiot that I was, I
might have slept on one of those carpets, but it never occurred
to me. In the morning I heard the caretaker unlocking
the gate. I waited for a moment and then headed straight
outside. The caretaker was standing by the gate, and when
he saw a stranger coming through the passageway, he was so
240
startled that he forgot to make a fuss.
“A couple of days later I went to see Mrs. Severynova.
Grates had been installed in front of the windows and, sure
enough, rolling around on the sacred Chintamani pattern
was that disgusting toad of a dog. When Amina saw me, she
joyfully wagged that stumpy sausage which, on other dogs,
would be called a tail. Mrs. Severynova beamed at me.
‘There’s our darling Amina, sir, our treasure, our dear little
doggie. Did you know that a burglar broke in through the
window the other day and our Amina chased him away?
Why, I wouldn’t give her up for anything in the world,’ she
declared proudly. ‘But she’s fond of you, sir. She knows an
honest person when she sees one, don’t you, Amina?’
“Well, that’s it. That unique bird carpet is lying there to
this very day — I believe it’s one of the rarest carpet specimens
in the world. And to this very day, that obese, mangy,
stinking Amina is lying on top of it, grunting with bliss. It
wouldn’t surprise me if some day she smothers in her own
fat, and then perhaps I’ll try again. But first I have to learn
how to file through a grate.”
241
A Safecracker and an Arsonist
“The thing is,” said Mr. Jilek, “if you’re going to steal, you
have to know what you’re doing. That’s what Mr. Balaban
always used to say. He’s the safecracker who pulled his last
job at Scholle and Co. This Balaban was a very knowledgeable
and prudent safecracker. Of course he was older by
then, and it stands to reason that not everybody has the
benefit of so much experience; a young man’s more likely to
take a gamble. Well, you can succeed in a lot of things with
courage alone, you know, but when a person begins to think
things through, chances are he loses his courage, and that’s
why he goes about his business with prudence. It pays off in
politics and everything else.
“What Balaban used to say is that every kind of work
has its own rules. And when it comes to safes, one of them
is that a safecracker always has to work alone, because he
can’t rely on anybody else. The second thing is that he never
works long in any one place, because they’ll begin to recognize
his work. And the third thing is that he has to keep up
with the times and on top of everything new in his field.
Still and all, he has to stick with tradition and probabilities,
too, because the more people there are working in the same
way, the harder it is for the police. That’s why Balaban kept
a wrench with him, even though he had an electric drill and
had even learned how to handle explosives. He used to say
it’s pointless, nothing but vain ambition, to take on these
modern armor-plated safes. He preferred working the old
reliable establishments, the ones that have old-style steel
safes with honest money inside, not these checks. He had it
all thought out and nailed down, did Balaban. On top of
242
that, he had a shop dealing in old brass, a real estate business,
a racket in horses and, all things considered, he did
pretty well for himself. Now, Balaban had gone around
saying that he was only going to do one more safe, but it
would be such a clean piece of work that the younger
generation would be knocked for a loop. They say that the
main thing isn’t to make big money, but Balaban used to say
that the main thing is not to get caught.
“Well, the last safe Balaban cleaned out was at Scholle
and Co., of course, that factory in Bubenec, you know. But
what he did there was truly a solid piece of work; that’s
what I was told by this police detective, a man named
Pistora. Balaban climbed in through a window looking out
on the courtyard, just like Dr. Vitasek, except that he had to
pry some bars loose. It was a real pleasure, said Pistora, to
see how neatly he took out those bars: he didn’t leave one
scrap of trash lying around, that’s how beautifully the man
worked. And at the same spot where he first drilled into the
safe, that’s where he opened it, too. There wasn’t a single
unnecessary hole or gouge, not a nick or a dent. In fact he
didn’t even scratch the paint on the safe any more than he
had to. It was really something, said Pistora, to see the kind
of love that man put into what he did. The fact is, that safe
is in the police museum now, on account of it’s a masterful
piece of work. After scooping out the money, maybe sixty
thousand, he ate a bit of bread and bacon he’d brought with
him and left by the same window. Balaban used to say that
the main thing generals and safecrackers have to worry
about is retreating. Then he took the money to his cousin’s,
hid his tools with somebody named Lizner, went home,
cleaned his clothes and boots, washed up, and climbed into
bed like any regular citizen.
“It wasn’t even eight o’clock in the morning when
somebody knocked on the door and called, ‘Open up, Mr.
Balaban!’ Balaban wondered who on earth it could be, but
he opened the door with an easy conscience; and in rushed
243
two police officers along with Inspector Pistora. I don’t
know if you know Pistora — he’s a short little fellow with
teeth like a squirrel and he’s always grinning. He worked for
a funeral parlor once, but he had to find another way to
earn his living, because people couldn’t help but smile when
he’d step out in front of the coffin grinning in that funny
way. What I think is, a lot of people grin only because
they’re embarrassed that they don’t know what to do with
their mouths, just like other people don’t know what to do
with their hands. That’s why people smile in that silly, overeager
way when they talk with a great man, a king or a
president, say; it isn’t from pleasure so much as from embarrassment.
But I wanted to tell you about Balaban.
“When Balaban saw Pistora and those two policemen,
he fired off in righteous anger, ‘What are you fellowth doing
here? You don’t have any bithness buthting in on me.’ — He
himself was taken aback by the way he was lisping.
“‘But Mr. Balaban,’ this Pistora smiled, ‘we’re only here
to take a look at your teeth.’ And he went straight over to
this hand-painted mug where Balaban kept his dentures at
night — the fact is, he’d lost most of his teeth that time he
leaped from a window. ‘Yes indeedy, Mr. Balaban,’ this
Pistora says with great satisfaction, ‘they wouldn’t stay put,
these here false teeth of yours. These teeth just come to life
whenever you start to drill, and so you took them out and
put them on the desk at Scholle and Co. My, but there was
a lot of dust there — Mr. Balaban, you should of known
that from the amount of dust on those account books, too.
When we found your toothprints there, Mr. Balaban, we just
had to come after you; there’s no use getting mad at us. You
should of wiped that dust off first.’
“‘Thon of a gun,’ Mr. Balaban marveled. ‘You know,
Pithtora, they thay that even the cleveretht crook can make
one mithtake.’
“‘Except you made two,’ Mr. Pistora grinned. ‘All we
had to do was take one look and already you were our
244
suspect, and you know why? Every regular safecracker pisses
on the spot to keep from getting caught; it’s kind of a
superstition. Except you’re such a infidel and thinker, you
just turn up your nose at superstition. You think brains and
reason is all you need. That’s a big mistake. Yes indeedy, Mr.
Balaban: if you’re going to steal, you have to know what
you’re doing.’”
* * *
“‘Some people are so skillful,’ said Mr. Maly, expanding on
the theme, ‘that you have to give them credit. I read somewhere
about a case like that, and it may be that some of
you don’t know about it. It happened in Austria somewhere.
There was this master saddler and strap-maker there, his
Christian name was Anton, and his last name was Huber or
Vogt or Meyer or one of those names Germans usually have.
Anyway, this saddler was celebrating his nameday and he
was sitting at his big nameday lunch — except they don’t set
that good a table in that part of Austria, not even on
namedays, not like we do. I’ve heard they even eat chestnuts
there. Anyway, this saddler is sitting there in the circle of his
family, and suddenly there’s someone banging on the window,
‘Jesus and Mary, neighbors, your roof’s burning right
over your heads!’ The saddler dashed out, and sure enough,
the rafters were going up in flames. The children start
yelling, of course, the wife runs out in tears carrying the
clock — well, I’ve seen a whole bunch of fires, and it’s my
observation that people usually lose their heads and start
running out with something completely useless, clocks or
coffee-grinders or canaries in cages. And only when it’s too
late do they remember that they left grandma back inside
and all their clothes and a whole bunch of other things.
Meanwhile people crowd around and start getting in each
other’s way trying to put out the fire. Then the firemen
come — you know, firemen have to change into uniform
245
before they can start putting out a fire; but meanwhile it’s
already set the next building on fire, and by evening there’s
fifteen of them burnt to ashes. Anyone who wants to see a
real fire has to go out to the countryside or a small town.
They don’t have them in big cities anymore; you’re more
likely to find yourself watching the firemen’s techniques than
the fire. It’s best when you can help put out the fire yourself
or, even better, advise everybody else on how to extinguish
it. Extinguishing a fire is wonderful work, the way it sizzles
and snaps; but hauling water from the river, a person’s not
too happy doing that — There’s something very peculiar
about people: whenever they see some disaster, they almost
wish it wouldn’t stop. A great fire or flood stimulates them,
somehow. You might say it gives them a sense of coming
alive. Or maybe it’s pure pagan wonderment, I don’t know.
“The day after the fire, of course, the place was like —
well, it was dead. A fire is a beautiful thing, but the aftermath
of the fire afterwards is devastating; it’s the same with
love. All you can do is look on with this helpless feeling,
thinking that you’ll never pull yourself together again. Well,
anyway, there was a young police sergeant investigating the
cause of the fire. ‘Sergeant,’ the saddler Anton said, ‘I’m
betting that somebody lit it. Why else would it have broken
out on my nameday while I was sitting there at lunch? But it
beats me why somebody’d want to take revenge on me,
because for sure I haven’t done anything bad to anybody,
not to mention my lack of interest in politics. I just don’t
know of anyone who’d hate me that much.’
“It was noontime and the sun was scorching hot. The
police sergeant walked through the aftermath of the fire and
thought that not even the devil himself could figure out how
it started. ‘Mr. Anton,’ he said suddenly, ‘what’s that shining
up there on that beam?’ ‘There used to be a dormer window
there,’ said the saddler. ‘Must be some kind of nail.’ ‘Doesn’t
look much like a nail,’ said the sergeant, ‘looks more like a
mirror.’ ‘What would a mirror be doing up there?’ said the
246
saddler. ‘The only thing up in that gable was straw.’ ‘No, it’s
a mirror,’ said the sergeant, ‘and I’ll show it to you.’
“So he propped the firemen’s ladder against the charred
beam, crawled up it, and said, ‘You know, Mr. Anton, it’s
not a nail or a mirror, either one. It’s the crystal from a
watch that’s been set right into the beam. What it’s there
for?’ ‘Beats me,’ said the saddler. ‘Maybe the kids were
playing with it.’ And suddenly the sergeant, who had been
peering at the crystal this way and that, roared in pain:
‘Ow! that burns like the devil! What was it?’ And he
touched himself gingerly on the nose. ‘Dammit,’ he roared a
second time, ‘now it’s burned me on the hand! Quick, Mr.
Anton, hand me up some paper!’ So the saddler tore off a
page from his notepad, and the sergeant stuck the paper
under the crystal. ‘That’s it,’ he said a moment later; ‘seems
to me, Mr. Anton, we’ve got it.’ He was already crawling
back down the ladder and holding the piece of paper in
front of the saddler’s eyes; a tiny hole had been burned in it
and was still smoldering. ‘Mr. Anton,’ said the sergeant, ‘this
crystal is a lens, I’d like you to know. In other words, it’s a
magnifying glass. And now I’d like to know who set it into
that beam under the pile of straw. But I’ll tell you, Mr.
Anton, whoever did it’s leaving here in handcuffs.’
“‘I’ll be jiggered,’ said the saddler. ‘We never had any
magnifying glass or anything in the house — wait,’ he
suddenly cried, ‘wait just a minute! I had this apprentice, a
boy named Sepp, and that kid was always fooling around
with the darndest things! That’s why I kicked him out: he
never did anything useful, because his head was always full
of doing experiments and crazy things like that! To think it
could have been that darn boy — But that’s impossible,
Sergeant. See, I kicked him out way back in the beginning of
February. Who knows where he is now, but he’s never
showed up around here since.’
“‘If the lens is his, I think we’ve got it,’ said the sergeant.
‘Mr. Anton, telegraph the city and tell them to send
247
me two more officers. I’m not letting anyone touch this lens.
First thing we do is find that boy.’
“Of course, they found him. He was apprenticing with
some trunk-maker in an entirely different town, and the
sergeant barely stepped into the workshop before the boy
began shaking like a leaf. ‘Sepp,’ the sergeant shouted at
him, ‘where were you on the thirtieth of June?’
“‘Here, sir,’ the boy jerked out. ‘I’ve been here since
February fifteenth and I haven’t been gone even half a day, I
swear it.’ ‘That’s right,’ said the trunk-maker, ‘I can swear to
that myself, because he lives with me and has to stay here
the whole time.’
“‘That’s our bad luck, then,’ said the sergeant. ‘Looks
like it can’t be him.’
“‘So what did you want him for, anyway?’ asked the
trunk-maker.
“‘The thing is,’ the sergeant replied, ‘he was under
suspicion that on June thirtieth, the devil take it now, he set
fire to Anton the saddler’s place and half the district with it.’
“‘June thirtieth?’ said the trunk-maker, puzzled. ‘Listen,
that’s odd. On June thirtieth this boy asked me: What day is
today? Is it June thirtieth? Then it’s St. Anton’s Day, isn’t it?
Let me tell you, something’s going to happen somewhere
today.’
“At that instant the boy Sepp jumped up and tried to
make a run for it, but the sergeant grabbed him by the
collar. Later, on the way back, the boy confessed that he’d
been furious with Mr. Anton, because the saddler, on account
of his experiments, had beat him like a dog; that he
wanted to get revenge on him, and that’s why he’d calculated
precisely where the sun would be at noon on June
thirtieth, Mr. Anton’s nameday, and according to that had
placed the lens so that it would ignite the beam, while he
himself would be God-knows-where. He’d set it all up in
February and then left his apprenticeship.
“Listen, what they did next was call some astronomer
248
in Vienna about that business with the lens, and the man
was astounded at how the exact position of the sun at its
zenith on June thirtieth had been calculated so precisely. He
said it’s nothing short of a miracle for a fifteen-year-old boy
to discover that with no astronomical instruments for measuring
angles.
“What happened later to this Sepp, I don’t know; but I
keep thinking how that young hooligan could have been an
astronomer some day, or a physicist. Why, he could have
been a second Newton or something, that damned kid! But
the world lets so much special know-how and beautiful
talent go to waste — You know, people have such patience
when they’re searching for diamonds in the earth or pearls
in the sea; they ought to search like that in people for rare
and wondrous gifts from God. Then people wouldn’t go to
waste, no doubt about it. And that’s a great mistake.”
249
The Stolen Murder
“That reminds me of a case,” said Mr. Houdek, “which was
also very carefully thought out and prepared for. But I’m
afraid you won’t like it, because it doesn’t have an ending or
solution. If it bores you, just say so and I’ll stop.
“As you probably know, I live on Krucembursky Street,
in Prague’s Vinohrady district. It’s one of those short sidestreets
with no neighborhood pub, not even a laundry or a
grocery shop, where everybody’s in bed by ten o’clock,
except for those debauchees who stay up listening to the
radio and consequently don’t get to bed till eleven. As for
those of us who live there, for the most part we’re harmless
taxpayers and low-level office workers, a few aquarium
enthusiasts, one zitherist, two stamp-collectors, one vegetarian,
one spiritualist, and one traveling salesman who, as a
matter of fact, also goes in for theosophy. Apart from that,
all you’ll find there are landladies from whom the aforementioned
persons rent clean, nicely-furnished rooms with
breakfast, as they say in the classifieds. Once a week, always
on Thursdays, the theosophist doesn’t get home till around
midnight, because that’s when he does his spiritualist exercises.
On Tuesdays, two of the goldfish-buffs don’t get home
till around midnight either, because they go to Aquarium
Society meetings and then stand under the streetlight arguing
about viviparous varieties and bug-eyed carp. Three years
ago a drunk actually wandered down our street, but presumably
he was from some other neighborhood and had simply
lost his way. And then there was this Russian named
Kovalenko or Kopytenko who used to come home every
night at a quarter past eleven, a smallish man with sparse
250
whiskers who lived at Mrs. Janska’s, No. 7. What this
Russian did for a living, nobody knew; but he used to
lounge around the house till five in the afternoon, and then
go off to the nearest streetcar stop, briefcase in hand, and
ride into town. At exactly a quarter past eleven he’d get off
at the same stop and turn the corner into Krucembursky
Street. Somebody afterwards claimed that the Russian used
to go sit in a certain coffeehouse the whole time, quarreling
with other Russians. But other people said he couldn’t have
been a Russian, because Russians never go home that early.
“One night, it was last February, I was already snoozing
when suddenly I heard five shots ring out. At first I dreamed
I was a little boy again, cracking a whip in our backyard,
and I was terribly pleased by the sound of the sharp cracks.
But then I woke up all of a sudden and realized that someone
was firing a gun out in the street. So I flew to the
window and opened it, and I saw a man with a briefcase in
his hand lying face down on the sidewalk right in front of
No. 7. — But at that same moment I heard the pounding of
footsteps, and a policeman rounded the corner, ran up to the
man, and tried to lift him. Then he let him go again, said
Damn it! and blew his whistle. A moment later, another
policeman appeared at the corner and ran over to the first
one.
“Needless to say, I immediately threw on my slippers
and overcoat and rushed downstairs. The vegetarian, the
zitherist, one of the goldfish-buffs, two landladies, and one
stamp-collector also came running out of their houses; the
rest just watched from their windows, looking scared to
death and telling themselves: The hell with it, I could get in
trouble myself if I went out there. Meanwhile the two
policemen had turned the man over onto his back.
“‘Why, it’s the Russian, Kopytenko or Kovalenko, who
lives at Mrs. Janska’s,’ I said, my teeth chattering. ‘Is he
dead?’
“‘I don’t know,’ said one of the policemen, looking
251
baffled. ‘We need to call a doctor.’
“‘W-Why are you just letting him lie there?’ the frightened
zitherist stuttered in protest. ‘You should t-t-take him
to the hospital!’
“By this time about a dozen of us had collected there,
and we were shivering with cold and horror, while the
policemen knelt down by the man who’d been shot and, for
some reason, loosened his collar. At that moment a taxi
pulled up at the corner, and the driver came over to see
what was going on; probably he hoped it was some drunk
he could drive back home.
“‘What’s up, men?’ he asked affably.
“‘A man’s been sh-sh-shot,’ stuttered the vegetarian. ‘Put
him in your t-t-taxi and t-t-take him to the hospital! Maybe
he’s still alive!’
“‘God,’ said the cab driver, ‘I hate fares like this. Well,
wait here and I’ll bring the cab over.’ Then he walked slowly
back to his cab and drove up to where we were standing.
‘All right, put him in,’ he said.
The two policemen lifted the Russian and, with great
effort, managed to get him into the taxi; true, he was pretty
much on the small side, but maneuvering corpses around is
no easy job.
“‘Look, old buddy, you go with him,’ said the first
policeman to the other one, ‘and I’ll get the names of the
witnesses. Take him to the hospital, cabbie, and step on it.’
“‘Sure, step on it,’ grumbled the cab driver, ‘and me
with lousy brakes.’ And he drove off.
“The first policeman took a notebook from his pocket
and said, ‘You’ll need to give me your names, gentlemen. It’s
only because you’re witnesses.’ And then, with agonizing
slowness, he wrote down our names, one after the other, in
his notebook; probably his fingers were numb, but we poor
bastards were frozen stiff by the time he finished. When I
got back to my room it was only eleven twenty-five, so the
whole spectacle hadn’t lasted more than ten minutes.
252
“I suspect that Mr. Taussig here will think there’s
nothing particularly unusual about this affair. But you know,
Mr. Taussig, in a respectable little street like ours, something
like this is a very big deal. The streets right next to ours are
still basking in reflected glory and telling everybody that it
happened just around the corner. The streets a bit farther off
pretend it’s a matter of complete indifference to them, but
you can chalk that up to pure spite and envy because it
didn’t happen there. A few streets away in the other direction,
they simply dismiss the whole thing and say, ‘Supposedly
somebody took a pot shot or something at somebody
there, but who knows if there’s anything to it.’ Petty grumbling
is what I call it.
“You can imagine how all of us on our street made a
dash for the newspapers the next day. For one thing we
wanted to learn more about our murder, and for another we
were really rather pleased to think there’d be something in
the newspapers about our street and what had happened to
us. It’s a well-known fact that what people like to read
about most of all in the papers is something they themselves
have seen, something to which they were, as they say,
eyewitnesses. Let’s say a horse falls down in Ujezd Street,
thereby holding up the traffic for ten minutes. If there’s
nothing about it in the newspaper, the people who saw it
happen get angry at the paper and slam it down on the
table, swearing that there’s nothing worth reading in it.
They’re insulted nearly to the point of libel that the paper
didn’t consider it important enough to mention the accident
that they are, so to speak, co-owners of. If you ask me, the
only reason papers publish local news items is because if
they didn’t, the eyewitnesses would have such a fit they’d
stop buying newspapers altogether.
“Let me tell you, we were flabbergasted when not one
newspaper carried a single word about our murder. Scandals
of every kind you’d want to name, and blasted politics,
they’ve got plenty of articles about those, we grumbled,
253
they’ve even got a story about a streetcar colliding with a
pushcart, but not one mention of the murder anywhere;
these newspapers are rotten, they’re corrupt! But then it
occurred to the stamp-collector that maybe the police had
asked the papers not to write anything about the matter for
the moment, in the interests of their investigation. Well, that
satisfied us, but it also heightened our curiosity. We were
proud to think that we lived on such an important street
and that we might even be called as witnesses in what was
evidently a very secret affair. But the next day, again, there
was nothing in the papers and nobody from the police
turned up to ask questions. And what struck us as strangest
of all was that nobody had come to Mrs. Janska’s to conduct
a search or to at least seal off the Russian’s room.
That’s when we started getting alarmed; the zitherist said
that maybe the police wanted to hush it up, because who
knows what might be behind it. And when on the third day
there was still no mention of our murder, our street began
protesting that we weren’t going to let the matter drop, that
the Russian had been one of us and we were damn well
going to get to the bottom of it; that anyhow, our street had
been brazenly and shamefully ignored; we had bad paving
and bad lighting, and no doubt things would look very
different if a member of parliament or someone from the
newspapers lived here. But the problem was, our respectable
little street had no one to plead its case. In short, spontaneous
dissatisfaction ballooned, and the neighbors prevailed on
me, as an older and more or less unaffiliated resident, to go
down to the police station and point out just how improperly
this murder was being handled.
“So off I went to see Captain Bartosek. I know him
slightly, he’s a glum sort of man; they say it’s because he’s
suffering from an unhappy love affair and that’s why he
joined the police. ‘Captain, sir,’ I said to him, ‘the reason
I’m here is to ask you what’s being done about that murder
on Krucembursky Street. We’re beginning to think it’s being
254
kept under wraps.’
“‘What murder?’ asked the captain. ‘No murder’s been
reported there, and it’s in our precinct.’
“‘The one that happened just the other day,’ I explained
to him, ‘when that Russian Kopytenko or Kovalenko was
shot in the middle of the street. Two policemen came, and
one of them wrote down our names as witnesses and the
other drove off with the Russian to the hospital.’
“‘That’s not possible,’ said the captain. ‘Nothing’s been
reported. There must be some mistake.’
“‘But, Captain,’ I said, beginning to lose my temper,
‘there were at least fifty people who saw it, and we can all
testify to what happened! We’re all good, honest citizens, sir.
If you tell us to keep our mouths shut about the murder,
we’ll do our best to keep them shut, even if we don’t know
why. But just allowing someone to get shot, that’s too much.
We’ll give the story to the newspapers.’
“‘Now wait a minute,’ said Bartosek, and his look was
so grim it frightened me. ‘I want you to tell me, if you
please, in a nice orderly way, exactly what happened.’
“So I told him, in a nice orderly way, exactly what had
happened; and if you can believe it, his face turned purple,
as if something inside were coming to a full boil. But when I
got to the place where the first policeman told the other one:
Look, old buddy, you go with him and I’ll get the names of
the witnesses — when I told him that, his pent-up breath
exploded and he roared, ‘Those weren’t our men, thank
God! In the name of heaven, why didn’t you call the police
on those police? Your common sense should have told you
that uniformed police never call each other Old Buddy!
Maybe plainclothesmen do, but uniformed officers, never in
all their born days! You damned civilian, you Old Buddy,
you should have had those two hauled into custody at once!’
“‘But why?’ I faltered, feeling miserable.
“‘Because they shot the Russian,’ the captain bellowed.
‘Or at any rate, they had a hand in it! How long have you
255
been living in Krucembursky Street?’
“‘Nine years,’ I said.
“‘Then you ought to know that at eleven fifteen, the
nearest patrol officer is down at the market hall, and the
nearest one after that is at the corner of Slezka and Perun
Streets, and the third one’s walking his beat according to the
duty roster for Officer number 1388 and so forth, right on
down the line. That corner where your policeman came
running from, our policeman would have come running from
there at either ten forty-eight or else twenty-three minutes
after midnight, but not at any other time, because he’s not
there at any other time! Every crook in town knows that,
for God’s sake, everybody but the people who live there!
You probably think there’s a policeman on every corner,
don’t you? Look, if one of our uniformed men had appeared
around that goddamned corner of yours at the time you say,
that would be a terrible thing, first of all because at that
exact time, according to the duty roster, he’s supposed to be
walking his beat at the market hall, and second, because he
didn’t report the murder. That would be an extremely
serious matter indeed.’
“‘But sir,’ I said, ‘what about the murder?’
“The captain was obviously calmer now, and he said,
‘That’s another matter entirely, and I think we’ll find it’s
pretty ugly business, Mr. Houdek. There’s a clever brain
behind this and a lot more than meets the eye. Those scoundrels
had it all worked out! First of all they knew what time
the Russian came home, in the second place they knew our
people’s appointed rounds, and in the third place they
needed the two days or more it would take for the police to
hear anything about the murder — no doubt they wanted
time to get away or cover their tracks. Now do you understand?’
“‘Well, not exactly,’ I said.
“‘Well, look,’ the captain explained patiently. ‘They
dressed up two of their men as policemen, and the two of
256
them were waiting just around the corner, either to shoot the
Russian or to wait until some third person had picked him
off. You were delighted, of course, to see how quickly our
praiseworthy police arrived on the scene. By the way,’ he
suddenly remembered, ‘when the first policeman blew his
whistle, what kind of sound did it make?’
“‘Fairly weak,’ I said, ‘but I thought he probably had a
sore throat.’
“‘Aha,’ the captain said with satisfaction. ‘Obviously
they wanted to make sure you didn’t report the murder to
the police, to give them time to get out of the country, see?
And you can bet that cab driver was one of the gang, too.
You don’t happen to remember the license number of the
cab, do you?’
“‘We didn’t notice the number,’ I said, crestfallen.
“‘Never mind,’ said the captain, ‘it was most likely a
fake anyway; but that’s how they got rid of the Russian’s
body. As a matter of fact, he wasn’t a Russian at all, but a
Macedonian named Protasov. I’m grateful to you, sir, but I’d
be even more grateful if you kept this whole thing quiet —
in the interests of our investigation, you know. No doubt
politics are mixed up in this somehow. But there must be a
damned clever person behind it, because as a rule, Mr.
Houdek, these political assassinations are handled pretty
clumsily. Politics, that’s not even an honest crime; it’s nothing
but a vulgar, sordid brawl,’ the captain said with disgust.
“Later on, a few inquiries were made. They never did
find out the motive behind the murder, but they did get the
names of the men who did it, only they’d long since left the
country. And so it happened that our street lost out completely
on its murder. It’s just as if somebody had torn out
the most glorious page of its history. If some stranger,
someone living in Foch Street, say, or someone from the
wilds of Vrsovice should happen to pass our way, he’d
probably say to himself, ‘What a dull little street this is!’
And nobody believes us when we brag about the mysterious
257
crime that was committed there. The fact is, though, those
other streets still begrudge us our murder.”
258
The Case Involving the Baby
“As long as we’re talking about Captain Bartosek,” said Mr.
Kratochvil, “I recall one case that never went public: it was
a case involving a baby. What happened was, one day this
young woman came running up to Bartosek at the police
station, she was the wife of an estate manager, name of
Landa, and she was crying so hard she couldn’t even catch
her breath. Bartosek felt sorry for her, with her swollen nose
and her face all splotchy from all those heartrending sobs, so
he tried to calm her down, well, to the extent that an old
bachelor can, anyway, and as much as a cop knows how.
‘Jesus, young lady,’ he told her, ‘cut it out, he’s not going to
bite your head off, you know; go home and get a good
night’s sleep and then you’ll be just fine. And if he’s going to
make a big stink about it, well, Hochman here will come
with you and read him the riot act. But you, little lady,
don’t give your man any cause for jealousy.’ That’s pretty
much how it went — What I mean is, that’s pretty much
how the police deal with most of these domestic tragedies.
“But this woman only shook her head and cried so
much, it was an awful sight to see.
“So then Mr. Bartosek took a different tack: ‘So he ran
out on you, did he? The dirty, no-good rat. But look, he’ll
be back again; a bum like that’s not worth making a fuss
over!’
“‘S-sir,’ the young woman wailed, ‘you don’t understand.
Th-they snatched my little baby right out on the
street!’
“‘Go on,’ the captain said in total disbelief, ‘why would
anyone do that? It could have run away on its own.’
259
“‘How could she run away?’ moaned the unhappy
mama. ‘Ruzenka’s only three months old!’
“‘Aha,’ said Mr. Bartosek, who didn’t have a clue as to
when a kid learns to walk. ‘And how, if you please, did they
manage to snatch it away from you?’
“Slowly it was dragged out of her, but not before he’d
sworn by every oath in the book that he would find the
baby without fail, in the hopes of pacifying the poor
woman. Here’s what had happened: Mr. Landa had gone off
to his office, and Mrs. Landova had made up her mind to
embroider a nice little bib for Ruzenka. And while she was
in the fabric shop, picking out embroidery thread, she left
the buggy, and Ruzenka, sitting outside. And when Mrs.
Landova went back out again, Ruzenka was gone and so
was the buggy. That was all he could get out of the weeping
mama after a good half-hour’s questioning.
“‘Well then, Mrs. Landova,’ Captain Bartosek finally
said, ‘that’s not so bad. Look, who’d swipe a baby? It’s more
likely that a little brat gets mislaid someplace or other; I had
a case like that once. If you ask me, a tiny tot like that
wouldn’t be worth much, I doubt if you could get much of a
price for it. But the buggy’d be worth something, and the
blankets — you had blankets in it, right? — well, they’d be
worth something, too; something like that would be worth
stealing. I think somebody just stole the buggy and those
blankets. I’d say it was a woman, because probably a man
with a buggy would look a little conspicuous. So this
woman tossed the baby somewhere,’ Bartosek said soothingly,
‘because I ask you, what else would she do with it? I
bet we have the little nipper back to you before the day is
out. It’ll turn up somewhere.’
“‘But Ruzenka’s going to be so hungry,’ the little
mother bawled; ‘she’s already due for a feeding!’
“‘We’ll get her something to drink,’ the captain promised.
‘You go back home now.’ And he telephoned for a
plainclothes officer to take the poor lady home.
260
“That afternoon the captain himself rang the doorbell
of the young woman’s house. ‘Well, Mrs. Landova,’ he
reported, ‘we’ve got the buggy; now the only thing missing
is the baby. We found the buggy, empty, in the hallway of a
house where there aren’t any babies. Some woman had come
there and told the apartment manager she only wanted to
feed her baby, and after that she left. — Damnedest thing,’
he went on, shaking his head, ‘it turns out this person
wanted to swipe the kidlet and nothing else. What I think,
dear lady, is that since this person was so concerned about
the little shrimp, there’s no way she’d hurt it or take a bite
out of it or anything. In short, you can stop worrying now,
and that’s that.’
“‘But I want my Ruzenka back,’ Mrs. Landova
screamed in desperation.
“‘Then you’ll have to give us some photographs, missus,
or a description of the baby,’ the captain said authoritatively.
“‘But Captain, sir,’ the young woman sobbed, ‘you
know that babies who aren’t even a year old yet shouldn’t
be photographed! It’s supposed to be bad for them, they say
it stunts a child’s growth — ‘
“‘Hm,’ the captain said, ‘then at least tell us what the
little jigger looks like.’
“With this the young mama complied copiously. ‘Everybody
says my Ruzenka has such pretty hair, and this cute
little nose, and such beautiful little eyes, and she weighs nine
pounds, fourteen point three ounces, and she has this beautiful
little bottom, and little folds on her chubby little legs — ‘
“‘What sort of folds?’ the captain asked.
“‘You just want to kiss them,’ the mama wept, ‘and you
should see her sweet little fingers and the way she smiles at
her mommy — ’
“‘Jesus, lady,’ Mr. Bartosek roared, ‘we can’t possibly
recognize her on the basis of that! Doesn’t she have any
identifying marks?’
“‘She has little pink ribbons on her bonnet,’ the young
261
woman sobbed. ‘All baby girls have little pink ribbons! For
the love of God, sir, find my Ruzenka for me!’
“‘What about her teeth?’ Mr. Bartosek asked.
“‘She doesn’t have any, she isn’t even three months old!
If you could only see how she smiled at her mommy!’ Mrs.
Landova fell to her knees: ‘Captain, sir, tell me that you’ll
find her for me!’
“‘There there, we’ll be on the lookout,’ mumbled Mr.
Bartosek, totally perplexed. ‘Please, get up! Look, the question
is why this person stole her. Can you tell me what
purpose a little sprout like that might serve?’
“Mrs. Landova’s eyes stared at him in alarm. ‘It is the
most beautiful in the world,’ she explained. ‘Sir, have you no
maternal feelings at all?’
“Mr. Bartosek, not wishing to acknowledge his insufficiencies,
quickly said, ‘I think that the only person who’d
snatch a little bugger like that is a mother who’s lost her
own and wants another one. You know how it is when
somebody takes your hat in a tavern: you just pick up
another one and leave. So here’s what I’ve arranged: I’m to
be notified of any place in Prague where a three-month-old
kiddie has died, and our people will go there and check it
out, understand? Except that, given your description, we
won’t know how to identify her.’
“‘But I’ll know her,’ Mrs. Landa sobbed.
“The captain shrugged his shoulders. ‘Even so,’ he said,
mulling it over, ‘I’d be willing to bet that woman stole the
little half-pint for a financial gain of some kind. Very little’s
stolen on account of love, dear lady; usually it’s for money.
My God, don’t cry like that! We’re doing all we can.’
“When Mr. Bartosek returned to the station, he said to
his people, ‘Listen, which one of you’s got a three-month-old
brat? Go bring it in here.’ So the wife of one of the officers
brings in her youngest. The captain has it unwrapped, and
he says, ‘Well, it’s definitely wet. Anyway, look, it’s got hair
on its head and it’s got wrinkles, too — this’ll be its nose,
262
right? — and it doesn’t have any teeth, either — Tell me,
young lady, please, can a little kid be identified on the basis
of that?’
“The officer’s wife hugged her youngest to her bosom.
‘It’s definitely my very own Manicka,’ she said proudly.
‘Can’t you see, Captain, sir, that she’s the very image of her
father?’
“The captain, sir, stared at Officer Hochman, who was
simpering over the undeniable fuzziness and small, puckered
snout of his heir and going ‘cootchy-coo’ with his fat finger
and saying ‘kee kee kitty-cat’ — ‘Well, I don’t know,’ the
captain muttered, ‘the nose looks a little different to me, but
probably it’s still growing. Hang on a minute, I’m going
over to the park and see what some other of these small fry
look like. What I mean is, any one of us can spot pickpockets
and muggers right off, but little sprigs in blankets, we
just don’t have anything to do with them.’
“After an hour Bartosek returned, defeated. ‘Listen,
Hochman,’ he said, ‘it’s a nightmare. All those babies look
alike! How am I ever going to put together a description?
We’re looking for a three-month-old infant, female sex, with
hair, a small nose, small eyes, and a wrinkled bottom; vital
statistics: weighs nine pounds, fourteen point three ounces.
Think that’ll do it?’
“‘Captain, sir,’ Officer Hochman said earnestly, ‘I
wouldn’t put much faith in those ounces. Those little fellers
weigh more one time and less the next, depending on how
much they dump in their diapers.’
“‘Jesus Christ,’ the captain groaned, ‘how am I supposed
to know that? A kid who can’t talk isn’t going to give
us much of a statement! Listen,’ he suddenly said with relief,
‘suppose we dump this case on somebody else, maybe the
Society for the Protection of Mothers and Infants!’
“‘Except we’ve got it down as a theft,’ the officer
objected.
“‘That’s true,’ the captain murmured. ‘My God, if it
263
was stolen watches or stolen anything else that’s reasonable,
I’d know how to deal with it. But I don’t have the least idea
how to go about looking for a stolen baby!’
“At that moment the door opened and a policeman
came in, leading the weeping Mrs. Landova. ‘Captain, sir,’
he announced, ‘this lady was trying to wrench a baby right
out of the arms of some woman on the street, and she was
creating a disturbance and making this huge racket the
whole time. So I pulled her in.’
“‘For Christ’s sake, Mrs. Landova,’ the captain spluttered,
‘what are you doing to us?’
“‘But that was my Ruzenka,’ the young woman wailed.
“‘That wasn’t any Ruzenka,’ said the policeman. ‘That
woman was Mrs. Roubalova from Budecsky Street and that
baby is her three-month-old boy.’
“‘Look here, you wretched creature,’ Mr. Bartosek
thundered. ‘You get yourself mixed up in police business one
more time and we quit the case cold, understand? — Wait,’
he remembered suddenly, ‘what sort of name does your baby
answer to?’
“‘We call her Ruzenka,’ sobbed her mother, ‘Ruzenka
Dudenka, deedle-deedle dee, ducky-poo, scooter, tiny pockets,
angel baby, Daddy’s little sweetheart, Mommy’s girl,
funny face, kissy missy, Her Wetness, baby bug, darling
birdie, precious — ’
“‘And she answers to all of those?’ the captain asked,
astounded.
“‘She understands all of them,’ the little mama asssured
him through her tears. ‘And the way she smiles when you
say hafhaf, bububu, tiddlymiddly, or teeteetee — ‘
“‘That’s not going to help us very much,’ the captain
remarked. ‘Unfortunately, Mrs. Landova, I have to tell you
that, frankly, we’re stymied. In those families where a child’s
death has been registered, your Ruzenka didn’t show up.
Our people have already checked out everything.’
“Mrs. Landova stood motionless, staring straight ahead.
264
‘Captain,’ she cried out in a sudden flash of hope, ‘I will
give ten thousand to whoever finds Ruzenka for me! Write
down the amount: whoever tracks down my child for you
will receive ten thousand!’
“‘I wouldn’t do that, dear lady,’ Mr. Bartosek said
doubtfully.
“‘You haven’t any feelings,’ the young woman cried. ‘I
would give the whole world for my Ruzenka!’
“‘Well, if that’s what you want,’ Mr. Bartosek
grumbled, thoroughly fed up, ‘I’ll announce it, but only if
you’ll for God’s sake stop interfering with our work!’
“‘This is one tough case,’ he sighed, the moment the
door closed behind her. ‘But wait, I know exactly what’s
going to happen next.’
“And that’s exactly what happened. The next day, three
plainclothes officers each brought in a screaming, threemonth-
old baby girl, and one of the men, it was that same
Pistora, even stuck his head in the door with his toothy
smile and said, ‘Captain, sir, couldn’t it have been a baby
boy? I could get you a baby boy cheap!’
“‘That’s what comes of having a reward,’ Mr. Bartosek
railed. ‘Any minute now, it’ll look like a foundling home in
here. Damned case!’
“‘Damned case,’ he said to himself in exasperation
when finally he left for his bachelor’s abode. ‘I’d like to
know how we’re going to find that tyke now.’
“When he arrived home, he found that his cleaning
woman, an outspoken, irreverent old scold, was glowing
with rapture. ‘Get over here, Captain,’ she told him by way
of a greeting, ‘and take a look at your Baryna!’
“I should mention that a judge had given Mr. Bartosek
this thoroughbred boxer bitch, Baryna, who’d been seduced
by a certain German shepherd. You know, given all the
different breeds there are, it’s a wonder that dogs ever
recognize other dogs as dogs. I just don’t understand how a
borzoi knows that a dachshund is a dog, too. We people
265
differ only in language or religion, so it’s easy for us to sniff
each other out. Anyway, Baryna the boxer had nine puppies
with this German shepherd, and now she was all curled up
with them, wagging her tail and grinning away like crazy.
“‘Just look at her,’ the cleaning woman blared, ‘see how
proud she is of those puppies? She’s bragging about ‘em, the
sinful bitch! Bragging just like any mama!’
“Mr. Bartosek thought for a moment, and then he
asked, ‘Is that a fact? Is that what mamas do?’
“’Course it is,’ the cleaning woman trumpeted, ‘why
wouldn’t they? Give it a try yourself, flatter any mama’s
baby!’
“‘This is interesting,’ Mr. Bartosek muttered. ‘All right,
I’ll give it a try myself.’
“One day later, every mother in greater Prague was in
pure ecstasy. No sooner would they go out with their babies,
in their arms or in buggies, but a uniformed cop or some
plainclothesman in a bowler was right there next to them,
making foo-foo faces at their darling kiddies and chucking
them under the chin. ‘That’s a fine baby you’ve got there,
lady,’ they’d say, friendly as can be, ‘how old is it? — ‘ In a
nutshell, it was a day of pride and pleasure for each and
every mama.
“And sure enough, at eleven o’clock in the morning,
one of the plainclothesmen came to see Captain Bartosek
with this pale, shaking woman. ‘We’ve got her, sir,’ the man
announced obsequiously. ‘I came across her pushing a buggy,
and when I said to her, say, that’s a fine baby you’ve got
there, how old is it? — I’m telling you, she flashed me this
evil look and stowed her baby right out of sight. So I told
her, come with me, lady, and don’t give me any trouble.’
“‘Fetch Mrs. Landova,’ the captain said. ‘And you,
woman, tell me for God’s sake why you stole that baby!’
“The woman didn’t even try to deny it for very long,
just reeled off her story straightaway. It turned out she was
a single girl who had a baby by this man. Then not long ago
266
the baby got a little sick to her stomach and cried for two
nights. The third night this woman nursed her in bed and
then dozed off afterwards; and when she woke up the next
morning, it seems the baby was blue and dead. I don’t know
if that’s possible,” Mr. Kratochvil added with a degree of
uncertainty.
“It’s possible,” Dr. Vitasek interrupted him to say. “In
the first place, the mother wouldn’t have had any sleep;
second, the child probably had catarrh and had rejected the
breast for a couple of days. Therefore the breast was too
hard, and when the mother nursed her, the baby’s nose slid
down and she died from suffocation. That must have been
what happened. Go on.”
“Maybe that’s how it was,” Mr. Kratochvil continued.
“When in the morning the woman saw that her baby was
dead, she went out to tell a priest. But on the way she saw
Mrs. Landova’s buggy and that’s when she got the idea that,
if she could get hold of another baby, then this man would
keep on making payments to her. Besides,” Mr. Kratochvil
said in embarrassment, turning red, “they say that the
pressure from the milk can be really awful.”
Dr. Vitasek nodded. “That’s also true,” he said.
“You realize,” Mr. Kratochvil countered, “that I’m not
knowledgeable about these matters. Anyway, that’s why she
stole the baby and the buggy and later left the buggy in the
hallway of somebody else’s house. And then she carried this
Ruzenka home to take the place of her Zdenicka. But she
had to be some kind of crackbrain or eccentric, because
meanwhile she’d put her own dead baby in the fridge. They
say she wanted to bury her or set her out somewhere during
the night, but she couldn’t get up the nerve to do it.
“Meanwhile, Mrs. Landova had arrived. ‘Well, young
lady,’ Mr. Bartosek told her, ‘here’s your little nipper.’
“Tears spurted from Mrs. Landova’s eyes. ‘But that’s
not my Ruzenka,’ she choked, ‘Ruzenka was wearing a
different cap!’
267
“‘The hell you say,’ the captain shouted, ‘unwrap it!’
And since it was lying on his desk, he picked it up by the
feet and said, ‘Look, it’s got folds on its rear!’ But Mrs.
Landova had already fallen to the floor on her knees and
was kissing the piglet’s tiny hands and feet. ‘You’re my own
Ruzenka,’ she cried through her tears, ‘my tweety bird,
deedle-deedle dee, funny face, baby-buns, you’re my precious
— ‘
“‘Please, lady,’ Mr. Bartosek said, fuming, ‘knock it off
or I swear to God I’ll get married myself. And as for that
ten thousand, give it to an unmarried mother, understand?’
“‘Captain, sir,’ Mrs. Landova said solemnly, ‘hold my
child and give it your blessing!’
“‘Do I have to?’ grumbled Mr. Bartosek. ‘How are you
supposed to hold onto it? Oh, right. But it’s starting to
blubber! Take it back, lady, and get out of here — now!’
“And that’s how it ended, the case involving the baby.”
268
The Little Countess
“These crazy women,” said Mr. Polgar, “sometimes they get
up to things a person wouldn’t believe. It was in the year
nineteen or twenty, at any rate in those years when things
were smoldering everywhere in this blessed central Europe of
ours; people were just waiting for a scuffle to break out on
one side or the other. This place was swarming with spies
then, you can’t imagine. I was in charge of contraband and
counterfeit money in those days, and from time to time the
army called on me to provide them with certain kinds of
information. And that’s when this business with that silly
little countess occurred . . . let’s call her Countess
Mihalyova.
“One day, I don’t remember exactly when, but anyway,
the army received an anonymous letter telling them to keep
an eye on correspondence sent to W. Manasses in care of
General Delivery, Zurich. Later they intercepted just such a
letter. Believe it or not, it was in cipher, in our Code Number
11, and in it was military information to the effect that
a regiment from the 28th Infantry was garrisoned in Prague,
that there was a rifle range in Milovice, and that our forces
were armed with not only rifles but also bayonets: in short,
silly information. But you know, the army is very strict
about that sort of thing. If you let it leak to some foreign
power that our infantry wears calico leggings manufactured
by the Oberlander Company, you’d be brought before a
military court and get at least a year for espionage. But
that’s all part of military prestige.
“Well, the army showed me this coded letter and also
the anonymous tip. Listen, I’m no graphologist, but at first
269
glance I said to myself, maybe I’m crazy, but both of these
letters were written by the same hand. The anonymous tip is
written in pencil, true — most anonymous letters are written
in pencil, mind you. But it was obvious that this spy and
this informer were one and the same person. ‘You know
what?’ I told those soldiers, ‘drop it, it’s not worth your
time; this spy is some sort of amateur; those military secrets
of his are known to everyone who picks up a newspaper.’ So
much for that.
“About a month later, this captain from counterintelligence
came to me, a slim, handsome fellow. ‘Mr. Polgar,’ he
said, ‘the strangest thing has happened. Not long ago I went
dancing with this beautiful, dark-haired countess. She didn’t
speak Czech, but she danced divinely. And then today I
received a very emotional letter from her. I mean, people
don’t do that sort of thing.’
“‘Be glad, young man,’ I told him. ‘Sounds to me like
you’re just lucky with women.’
“‘But, Mr. Polgar,’ the captain said in despair, ‘this
letter is written in the same handwriting, with the same ink,
and on the same paper as those intelligence reports to
Zurich! I don’t know what to do. Imagine what it’s like for
a fellow to have to inform on a woman who . . . hm, who
is, to him . . . I mean,’ he blurted out in agitation, ‘well,
she’s a lady.’
“‘Indeed, Captain,’ I said to him, ‘those are chivalrous
feelings. You will have to take this woman into custody and,
given the seriousness of this matter, we’ll have to condemn
her to death; and you will have the honor of giving the
command to the twelve soldiers: Fire! You know, life is so
romantic. But unfortunately there is one obstacle: no W.
Manasses exists in Zurich, and to date fourteen coded letters
are waiting in his name at General Delivery in the Zurich
post office. Just forget it, young man, and go dancing again
with your dark-haired countess while you’re still young.’
“For three days the captain suffered from a remorseful
270
conscience to the point of losing weight, and only then did
he go to his superior. Well, six soldiers left in a car and they
arrested Countess Mihalyova and rummaged through her
papers. They found the code there and all kinds of letters
from foreign agents, the contents of which were, as they say,
highly treasonable. Nevertheless, the countess refused to
answer any questions at all, and her sister, a tadpole of
sixteen, sat on a table with her knees to her chin so that
everything showed, smoking cigarettes, flirting with the
officers, and laughing like an idiot.
“When I heard they’d hauled in the little Mihalyova, I
hurried down to military headquarters and I told them, ‘For
heaven’s sake, let the silly girl go, nothing but trouble’s
going to come of this.’ But they told me, ‘Mr. Polgar, the
Countess Mihalyova confessed to us that she is in the service
of a foreign spy ring. This is a serious matter.’ ‘Well, the
woman’s lying,’ I yelled. ‘Mr. Polgar,’ the colonel told me
sternly, ‘remember that you’re speaking of a lady. Countess
Mihalyova speaks the truth.’ — You see how that woman
had them bewitched? ‘Damn you,’ I swore, ‘you’ll get her
the death sentence with your gallantry! The hell with your
chivalrous sentiment! Can’t you see that this woman put you
on the trail of her treasonable activities herself and on
purpose? The whole thing’s a fake, don’t believe a word she
says!’ But the soldiers only shrugged their shoulders in tragic
regret.
“Naturally, the newspapers were full of the affair, even
the foreign press. The aristocracy the world over got on
their high horses and signed petitions, diplomats made
formal protests, public opinion was indignant even as far
away as England. But justice, you know, is unflinching. In
short, the little countess of noble birth, due to the state of
martial law, was brought before a military court. I went one
last time to the army — by now I already had all the information
I needed — and I told them, ‘Turn her over to me
and I’ll see that she’s punished.’ No use, they wouldn’t even
271
hear me out. But I must say it was a beautiful trial. I sat
there as moved as if I were watching a performance of
Camille. The foolish little countess, slender as an arrow and
dark as a Bedouin, admitted her guilt. ‘I am proud,’ she
said, ‘that I could serve the enemies of this land.’ The judges
were torn between gallantry and sense of duty, but it was no
use. There were those treasonous letters and all the other
foolishness, and the court, in view of the extraordinary
extenuating and aggravating circumstances, could do nothing
else but sentence Countess Mihalyova to a year in prison. As
I say, I’ve never seen such a beautiful trial in my life. At its
close the countess rose and in a clear voice declared, ‘Your
Honor, I consider it my duty to state that, in the course of
my interrogation and arrest, all Czecho- slovak officers
behaved like true gentlemen.’ By then I was nearly blubbering
out loud.
“But there you have it: when a man knows the truth, it
tickles his tongue and the truth must out. I don’t think
people lie out of spite or stupidity, but from some kind of
need or irresistible urge. Imagine this Mihalyova, then,
striking up an acquaintance somewhere in Vienna with the
famous Major Westermann and falling head over heels in
love. You know, of course, who this Westermann is. He’s the
fellow who practices heroism as a trade, and he’s clanking
with medals: the Maria Theresa, the Leopold, the Iron
Cross, the Turkish Star with diamonds, and I don’t know
what all he collected during the war. This Westermann, then,
is a ringleader in every illegal monarchistic putsch, plot, and
conspiracy imaginable. So the silly little countess fell in love
with this professional hero and most likely wanted to win
her knightly spurs in order to be worthy of him. In short,
for love of him she faked being a spy and then gave herself
away, all so she could look like a martyr for the glorious
cause. Only a woman would do such a thing.
“So I went to the prison where she was sitting out her
sentence, and I asked to talk with her. ‘Madam,’ I said to
272
her, ‘look: sitting in prison a whole year is a bore. They will
grant you a new trial if you would only confess how your
so-called espionage came about.’
“‘Sir, I have already confessed,’ the little countess told
me icily, ‘and I have nothing more to say.’
“‘Jesus Christ,’ I burst out, ‘stop this foolishness. Major
Westermann has been married for fifteen years and he’s got
three children.’
“The countess turned pale as ashes; to this day I’ve
never seen a woman grow ugly so suddenly. ‘What . . . what
is that to me?’ she finally said, but she had to force it out
through clenched teeth.
“‘And it should also interest you,’ I added, ‘that your
Major Westermann’s real name is Vaclav Malek and he’s a
baker from Prostejov, do you understand me? Here’s an old
snapshot of him; you recognize him, don’t you? For Christ’s
sake, Countess, why would you go to jail for a fraud like
him?’
“The little Mihalyova sat there stiff as wood. All at
once I saw that, in reality, she was an aging woman whose
lifelong dream had suddenly collapsed. I felt so sorry for her
and also somewhat ashamed. ‘Madam,’ I said quickly, ‘let’s
at least agree that I’ll send for your lawyer and you’ll tell
him — ‘
“The little Mihalyova rose, pale but taut as a bow.
‘No,’ she whispered, ‘that is not necessary. I have nothing
more to say.’ And she left. But right outside the door she
fell; they had to force her fingers apart, she had clamped
them together so tightly.
“I bit my lips. Well, it’s all out in the open now, I told
myself; truth has been served. But what, in heaven’s name, is
the whole truth of the matter? All these disclosures and
disillusionments, these bitter truths, disappointments, and
painful experiences, these are only a pinch of the truth. The
whole truth is greater. The whole truth is that love, pride,
passion, and ambition are such great and foolish things, that
273
every victim is heroic, and that human creatures in love are
something beautiful and astonishing. This is the other and
greater side of truth; but you would have to be a poet to see
and tell about it.”
* * *
“That’s right,” said police officer Horalek, “it always depends
on how the truth is told. Last year we picked up an
embezzler and took him to the lab to be fingerprinted. And
let me tell you, that fellow leaped smack out of the secondfloor
window into the street and took off running. Our
fingerprinter may be an old man, but at that moment he
forgot it, leaped right out the window after him, and broke
his foot. That got us good and mad, the way it always does
when something happens to one of our men, and after we
picked up that fellow we brought him back and roughed
him up a little.
“Then when we were called as witnesses at the trial,
this fellow’s lawyer told us, ‘Gentlemen, I don’t want to ask
you any inconvenient questions, and if you find them disagreeable
you don’t have to answer’ — you know, that
lawyer was smooth as a bottle of poison — ‘but when my
client tried to escape, you beat him up, didn’t you?’
“‘Not at all,’ I said, ‘we only wanted to find out if he’d
injured himself when he jumped, and when we saw he
hadn’t, well, we reproved him.’
“‘That must have been quite a reproof,’ the lawyer said
with a real polite smile. ‘According to the police doctor’s
report, my client, as a result of that reproof, had three
broken ribs as well as eight hundred square inches of bloody
bruises, most of which were on his back.’
“All I did was shrug. ‘He must have taken the reproof
to heart,’ I said; and it was just as well. The truth can be
many things, you know, but you need to find the right
words when you’re telling it.”
274
The Orchestra Conductor’s Story
“Sometimes,” said Mr. Dobes, “a bloody bruise or contusion
like that can hurt more than a fracture; but only when the
bruise is close to the bone. I know that; I’m an old soccer
player and I’ve broken a rib, my collarbone, and a thumb.
They just don’t play it with the same fire these days, not like
they did in my time. Anyway, last year I played one more
game; us older gents wanted to show these modern youths
what kind of tacticians we used to be. I was playing fullback
again, just like fifteen or twenty years ago. But when I
blocked the ball with my belly, my own goalie kicked me
right in the — well, what’s called the coccyx or cauda
equina. What with all the fuss and bustle, I just swore for a
second or two and then forgot about it. It didn’t start to
hurt until that night, and by the next morning I couldn’t
even move. No kidding, it hurt so bad I couldn’t even lift
my arm or sneeze — it’s odd how everything in the human
body’s connected. So I just lay there on my back like a dead
bug. I couldn’t shift over on my side or even wiggle my big
toe, nothing. All I could do was wheeze and moan about
how terrible the pain was.
“I lay there in that sorry state the whole day and the
next night, too. I couldn’t sleep even for a second. It’s
curious how slowly time drags by when you can’t move; it
must be really hard, for instance, for someone who’s dead
and buried. I did some calculations in my head and then did
some harder ones, I prayed, I even called to mind a few
poems to make the time pass, but the night wouldn’t end —
All of a sudden, it must have been about two in the morning,
I heard somebody running down the street as fast as his
275
feet could take him; and then a whole bunch of people came
charging after this somebody and you could hear maybe
half-a-dozen voices yelling, ‘Stop, I’m going to tear your guts
out,’ ‘You rotten scoundrel,’ ‘You bastard,’ and things like
that. They caught him right under my window, and you
wouldn’t believe the free-for-all that started up, with some
six pairs of legs, grunting and swearing, dull thuds like when
somebody’s whacking a head with a stick, panting, muttering,
but not a single scream. Listen, that’s not fair at all, six
against one and pounding on him like a punching bag. I
tried to get up out of bed and tell them it was just plain
unsportsmanlike, but I was howling with pain; dammit, I
couldn’t move! Helplessness like that is appalling. I gritted
my teeth and whimpered with rage like an animal. And then
suddenly it was like a dam broke inside me and I leaped out
of bed, grabbed a walking stick, and tore down the stairs.
When I burst out on the street I was completely blind. I
crashed into one fellow and, believe it or not, I started
clobbering him with the stick; the rest ran off in all directions,
but I’ve never in my life thrashed anybody like I did
that dolt. Only later did I realize that tears of pain had been
pouring down my face the whole time, and afterwards it
took me a whole hour to make my way back upstairs to
bed. But the very next morning I was walking again. I want
to tell you, it was nothing short of a miracle. I’d like to
know, though,” added Mr. Dobes reflectively, “which one of
them I clobbered like that; whether it was one of that
lopsided gang or the one getting beat up by the others. But
one on one, at least that’s fair.”
“Helplessness is indeed appalling,” said Kalina, the conductor
and composer, shaking his head. “I had an experience
like that once, in Liverpool; I’d been invited to conduct a
concert with their orchestra. You know, I can’t speak a word
of English; but we musicians can communicate among
276
ourselves without a lot of talk, especially when we have a
baton in hand. You just give it a tap, shout something, roll
your eyes and wave your arms, and then start all over again.
Even the most delicate feelings can be expressed that way:
for example, when I do this with my arms, everyone knows
that it means a mystical soaring and redemption-from-theburdens-
and-sorrows-of-life sort of thing. Well, when I
arrived in Liverpool these English people were waiting for
me at the station, and they took me off to a hotel so that I
could rest. But after I’d had a bath, I went out by myself to
have a look at the city. And while I was wandering around I
got lost.
“Whenever I go someplace new, the first thing I do is to
look for a river; a river gives you a sense of what I would
call the orchestration of the city. On one side you have all
the hubbub of the streets, the drums and tympani, the
woodwinds and brasses, and on the other side of the river
are the strings, a pianissimo of violins and harps; that way
you hear the entire city at once. But that river in Liverpool,
I don’t know its name, but it’s all yellow and nasty; and let
me tell you, that river booms and thunders, roars, bellows
and clatters, rumbles and hoots with steamships, tugboats,
packetboats, warehouses, shipyards, and cranes. You know, I
have an immense love of ships, whether it’s a black potbellied
tug or a red-painted freighter or those white transatlantic
liners. So I said to myself, well then, the ocean’s
bound to be just around the corner somewhere, I’ll go take a
look at it. And I started walking downstream along the bank
of the river. I trotted along for a good two hours, past
nothing but warehouses and pilings and docks; every once in
a while I would catch sight of a ship as tall as a cathedral,
or three fat, slanting funnels. There was a stench of fish,
horse sweat, jute, rum, wheat, coal, iron —
I don’t know whether you know this, but a huge pile of
iron has an overwhelming, unmistakably iron-like smell. I
was absolutely delighted. But by that time night was already
277
falling, and I had come to a sort of sandy bank, a lighthouse
was shining opposite me and tiny lights were drifting to and
fro — it could well have been the ocean. I sat there on a
stack of planks and felt so wonderfully alone and lost,
listening to the lap and murmur of the water, I could have
bayed with blissful longing. Then two people approached, a
man and a woman, but they didn’t see me. They sat down
with their backs to me and started conversing in low tones
— if I’d understood English, I would have coughed to let
them know I could hear. But since I didn’t know a word of
English other than ‘hotel’ and ‘shilling,’ I kept quiet.
“At first, their talk was rather staccato. Then the man
began to explain something slowly and quietly, as if he were
reluctant to let the words escape, and finally his words came
pouring out in a rush. The woman cried out in horror and
said something to him with great agitation; but he gripped
her hand until she whimpered, and then he began to urge
her, forcing the sounds out between his teeth. Believe me,
this was not an amorous conversation, a musician can
recognize that. A lover’s attempts at persuasion have quite a
different cadence and don’t sound so tense — a conversation
between lovers is a deep cello, but this was a high-pitched
double bass, played in presto rubato, in a single key, as if
the man were repeating the same phrase over and over
again. I began to feel rather alarmed: whatever the man was
proposing was something evil.
“The woman began to weep softly, and several times
she cried out in protest, as if she were trying to restrain him.
Her voice was a bit like a clarinet, with a woody resonance
that didn’t sound overly young. But the man’s voice became
harsher and more sibilant, as if he were threatening or
commanding her. The woman’s voice began to plead desperately
and she gasped with horror, the way a person gasps
when you apply an ice-cold compress, and I could hear her
teeth chattering. Then the man’s voice began to murmur in a
very deep, pure bass, almost loving in tone. The woman’s
278
weeping faded into short, passive sobs, which indicated that
her resistance had broken. But then the amorous sound of
the bass rose again and disjointedly, deliberately, insistently,
piled on phrase after phrase. At this the woman’s voice just
sobbed and wailed helplessly, and there was no longer any
resistance in it, only a frantic fear — not fear of the man,
but a tremulous, anticipatory dread of something to come.
And then the man’s voice sank down again to a consoling
murmur, laced with gentle threats. The woman’s weeping
changed to dispirited, defenseless sighs; and in a cold whisper
the man asked some questions to which she apparently
replied with a nod, for he was no longer insistent.
“Then the two of them got up and left, each in a
different direction.
“I must tell you that I don’t believe in hunches, but I do
believe in music. When I listened to those two voices that
night, I knew with absolute certainty that the bass was
persuading the clarinet to take part in some appalling act. I
knew that the clarinet would return home utterly subdued
and would do whatever the bass had ordered her to do. I
had heard it, and hearing words is better than understanding
them. I knew that preparations had been made for a crime
of some sort, and I knew what sort of crime it was. I could
tell by the horror those two voices conveyed: it was in the
timbre of those voices, in the cadence, the tempo, the intervals,
the rests — you see, music is precise, more precise than
speech. The clarinet was too simple, too uncomplicated to
carry anything out by itself; it could only assist, it could
only hand over a key or open a door. The harsh, deep bass
would perform the actual deed, while the clarinet stood by,
choking with terror. I ran back to the city, convinced that
something terrible was going to happen and that I had to do
something to prevent it. It’s a dreadful feeling, when you’re
afraid you’ll arrive too late.
“At last I saw a policeman on a street corner, and I
rushed up to him, sweating and completely out of breath.
279
‘Officer,’ I gasped, ‘any moment now, right in this city,
there’s going to be a murder!’
“The policeman shrugged his shoulders and said something
to me that I couldn’t comprehend. Damn, I suddenly
remembered, he can’t understand a word I’m saying!
“‘Murder,’ I yelled at him, as if he were deaf, ‘don’t you
understand? They’re going to kill some woman who’s living
alone! The maid or housekeeper is part of the plot — Good
Lord,’ I roared, ‘do something!’
“The policeman only shook his head and said something
that sounded like ‘yurvay.’
“‘Officer,’ I tried to explain in desperation, and I was
shaking with rage and horror the entire time, ‘that wretched
woman’s going to let her lover into the building, you can bet
your life on it! You can’t let it happen! Search for her!’ Just
then I realized that I didn’t even know what the woman
looked like; but even if I did, of course, I couldn’t have told
him. ‘Jesus Christ,’ I shouted, ‘it’s absolutely inhuman to let
this happen!’
“The English policeman looked me over carefully and
tried to soothe me. I clutched my head in my hands. ‘You
fool,’ I screamed, beside myself with desperation, ‘I’ll find
her myself!’
“I know, it was sheer madness, but look, you have to
do something when someone’s life is at stake. I ran all over
Liverpool that night, to see if I couldn’t spy somebody,
somewhere, trying to sneak into a house. It’s such a strange
city, so appallingly dead at night . . . Towards morning I sat
down on a curb and sobbed with fatigue. That’s where a
policeman found me, said ‘yurvay,’ and took me back to my
hotel.
“I don’t know how I conducted the rehearsal that
morning. But when I finally threw the baton to the floor and
dashed out to the street, the newsboys were shouting the
evening papers’ headlines. I bought one — across the top, in
huge letters, was the word MURDER, and underneath it was
280
a photograph of some white-haired woman. Evidently
‘murder’ is the English word for what I was trying to say.”
281
The Death of Baron Gandara
“Listen,” Mr. Mensik told them, “those cops in Liverpool
were bound to catch that murderer; it was a professional
job, and they usually do just fine with those. What they do
is round up all the notorious bad guys that are running
around loose, and then it’s, all right, boys, let’s hear what
kind of alibi you have this time. And when somebody hasn’t
got one, he’s it. What the police don’t like is dealing with
unknown entities. I’d say they make a point of hauling in
well-known or notorious big-time criminals. Once they get
somebody like that in their hands, they get his vital statistics
and take his fingerprints, and then he’s their man; from that
time on, they can turn to him in confidence whenever
something happens. They can go to him as an old acquaintance,
the same way a man goes to his barber or his tobacconist.
It’s worse when some amateur or greenhorn, let’s say
you or me, commits a crime; it’s that much harder for the
police to get their hands on him.
“I’ve got a relative down at police headquarters, his
name is Pitr and he’s my wife’s uncle. And what Uncle Pitr
says is, if it’s a robbery, then some kind of professional did
it; but if it’s a murder, then it’s bound to be someone in the
family. He has a very fixed point of view, does Uncle Pitr.
For instance, he claims that a man hardly ever murders a
stranger, because it’s not that easy. The opportunity to do it’s
much more likely to be found among people he already
knows; and in his own house, the opportunity’s right in the
palm of his hand. When they assign a murder case to Uncle
Pitr, he finds out who could have done it with the least
bother, and that’s who he goes after. ‘Look, Mensik,’ he
282
says, ‘I don’t have a scrap of imagination or inventiveness.
Anyone at headquarters can tell you I’m the biggest
bonehead there. The thing is, you see, I’m simple-minded the
same way a murderer is. Whatever I think of is just as
ordinary, everyday, and stupid as his motive, scheme, and
deed. And by and large, that’s exactly how I catch him out.’
“I don’t know if any of you recalls the murder of that
foreigner, Baron Gandara. He was a sort of mysterious
soldier of fortune. He had hair black as a crow’s and was
handsome as the devil. He lived in one of those nice houses
in Grabovka, and some of the things that used to go on
there you wouldn’t want to know about. Anyway, one
morning these two pistol shots were heard, some sort of
alarm went off, and later they found the baron in the
garden, shot to death. His wallet was gone, but otherwise
there weren’t any clues to speak of; in short, a mystifying
case of the first order. They assigned the murder to Uncle
Pitr because he wasn’t working on much of anything else,
but the chief also told him, ‘Admittedly, Lieutenant, this case
isn’t your usual style, but see to it that you prove you aren’t
yet ripe for a pension.’ So Uncle Pitr grumbled that he
would see to it and took off for the scene of the crime.
Needless to say, he found nothing, swore at the detectives,
and went back to sit at his desk again so he could light his
pipe. Anyone seeing him there in that stinking cloud of
smoke would suppose that Lieutenant Pitr was deep in
thought about the case, but that would be a big mistake.
Uncle Pitr wouldn’t have been deep in thought, because he’s
basically opposed to thinking. A murderer doesn’t think
either, he says; either something occurs to him or it doesn’t.
“Everyone else at headquarters felt sorry for Uncle Pitr.
It isn’t his type of case, they said, it’s a shame to waste
beautiful material like that on Pitr; Pitr does old women
who kill off their nephews or their maids’ skirt-chasing
boyfriends. One colleague, Dr. Mejzlik, strolled over to
Uncle Pitr as if by chance, sat down by his desk, and said,
283
‘What’s up, Lieutenant, anything new with the Gandara
case?’
“‘It’s got to be a nephew or something,’ said Uncle Pitr.
“‘Lieutenant,’ said Dr. Mejzlik, wanting to be helpful,
‘this case might be a bit different. I want to remind you that
Baron Gandara was an international spy; who knows what
kinds of strange things are going on here? — It puzzles me
that his wallet was missing. If I were in your place, I’d take
care to — ’
“Uncle Pitr shook his head. ‘Mejzlik,’ he said, ‘we’ve
each got our own methods. The first thing is to find out if
there are any relatives who could inherit anything.’
“‘For another thing,’ said Dr. Mejzlik, ‘we know that
Baron Gandara was a high-stakes gambler who took a lot of
chances. You don’t want to get mixed up with that crowd,
Lieutenant, you don’t have the background for it; all you
play is dominoes with Mensik. If you want, I can ask
around to see who played with him most recently — you
know, maybe what we have here is some kind of debt of
honor — ’
“Uncle Pitr frowned. ‘Listen,’ he said, ‘that means
nothing to me. I never had any dealings with those highclass
circles, and at my age I’m not going to start now.
Forget about debts of honor, I never had a case like that in
my life. If it isn’t a family murder, it’ll be robbery and
murder; and somebody from the household had to have
done it. That’s pretty much how it happens. Maybe the cook
has a nephew or something.’
“‘Or Gandara’s chauffeur,’ Mejzlik offered, to needle
Uncle.
“Uncle Pitr shook his head. ‘Chauffeurs,’ he said, ‘never
had a part in any of my cases. I can’t ever remember a
chauffeur pulling off a robbery and murder. Chauffeurs
booze it up and steal gas; but as for murdering somebody,
that I’ve yet to see. Look, Mejzlik, I stick by what I know.
When you get as old as I am — ’
284
“Dr. Mejzlik was losing his patience. ‘Lieutenant,’ he
blurted out, ‘there’s still a third possibility here. Baron
Gandara had an intimate relationship with a married
woman, the most beautiful woman in Prague. It’s possible
that this is a crime of passion.’
“‘It happens,’ Uncle Pitr agreed. ‘I’ve had five murders
like that. And what does the little lady’s husband do?’
“‘Big businessman,’ Dr. Mejzlik replied. ‘Huge company.’
“Uncle Peter turned this over in his mind. ‘Then that
doesn’t get us anywhere either,’ he said. ‘I’ve never had a
case where a big businessman shot somebody. Swindling,
that’s what they do; but crimes of passion, that’s done in
other circles. You’re wrong there, friend.’
“‘Lieutenant,’ Dr. Mejzlik continued, ‘you know how
Baron Gandara made his living? Blackmail. Believe me, that
man knew horrible things about — well, about a whole lot
of very wealthy people. It’s worth considering, the number
of people who might have an interest in — hm, in clearing
him out of the way.’
“‘Sure,’ Uncle Pitr said, ‘I had a case like that once, but
we couldn’t prove it; it was a total washout and a disgrace
to the force. I’m not getting my fingers burned a second time
with a case like that, not on your life. Your ordinary robbery
and murder suits me just fine. I don’t like sensation and
scandal. When I was your age, I too thought that someday
I’d crack some fabulous criminal case, ambition and all that.
It passes with the passing years, son. Later on, you realize
that most cases turn out to be pretty ordinary — ’
“‘Baron Gandara is no ordinary case,’ Dr. Mejzlik
objected. ‘I know him: a gentleman rogue, dark as a gypsy
— the best-looking scoundrel I ever saw. A mystery man. A
demon. A cardsharp. A fake baron. Listen, a man like that
doesn’t die in any ordinary way; not because of any ordinary
murder, either. Something else is going on here. A lot of
mysterious things.’
285
“‘Then they shouldn’t have given the case to me,’ Uncle
Pitr muttered in disgust. ‘I don’t have a head for mysterious
things. I like plain, ordinary murders, like a tobacconist’s
murder. Look, I’m not about to learn new methods. Since
they gave the case to me, I’m going to handle it my way;
and as far as I’m concerned it’s an ordinary robbery and
murder. If they’d given it to you, it would have turned into
some kind of crime sensation, a torrid romance, or a political
scandal — You’ve got a flair for romance, Mejzlik.
You’d have worked up a wonderful case with the material
we’ve got here. Too bad they didn’t give it to you.’
“‘Listen,’ Dr. Mejzlik burst out, ‘you wouldn’t have any
objection, would you, if I . . . strictly on my own . . .
pursued this case? The thing is, I have a lot of contacts who
know a great deal about this Gandara — Naturally I’d put
any information they gave me at your disposal,’ Mejzlik
added quickly. ‘It would still be your case — how about it?’
“Uncle Pitr snorted in irritation. ‘Thank you kindly,’ he
said, ‘but it wouldn’t work. Your style’s different from mine;
you’d go about it in an entirely different way than me. Best
not to mix things up. What would I do with your spies,
gamblers, fancy ladies, and all those bigwigs? That’s no use
to me, my young friend. If I’m the one that has to do this,
then it’s going to be my own grubby little run-of-the-mill
case . . . People do what they know how to do.’
“At that moment there was a knock and a detective
entered. ‘Lieutenant,’ he reported, ‘what we found out is
that the caretaker at Gandara’s house has a twenty-year-old
unemployed nephew living at 1451 Vrsovice, but he often
stayed at the caretaker’s. And the maid at the house has a
boyfriend who’s a soldier, but right now he’s on maneuvers.’
“‘Good,’ said Uncle Pitr. ‘Run over and have a look at
the caretaker’s nephew, search the place, and bring him back
here.’
“Two hours later, Uncle Pitr had Gandara’s wallet in his
hand, which they’d found under the young man’s bed. That
286
night they caught the lad out on a drinking spree, and in the
morning he confessed that he’d shot Gandara so that he
could steal the wallet; there was more than fifty thousand in
it.
“‘You see, Mensik,’ Uncle Pitr told me afterwards, ‘it’s
just like the case with that old lady on Kremencova Street;
the caretaker’s nephew was the killer there, too. But damn it,
son, when I think what might have happened if they’d given
that case to Mejzlik, what he would’ve done with that
material! I just don’t have the imagination for it, that’s all.’
287
The Breach-of-Promise Man
“To tell you the truth,” Detective Holub said and then
coughed politely, “we policemen don’t much care for unusual,
out-of-the-ordinary cases, and we don’t much care for
beginners, either. An old, accomplished crook, though, that’s
a different story. In the first place, we know right away he’s
the one who did it, because it’s his specialty; in the second
place, we know where to find him; and in the third place, he
doesn’t kick up a fuss and try to deny it, because he already
knows it won’t do him any good. I tell you, friends, it’s a
pleasure to work with an experienced man like that. And I
can tell you too that, even in jail, the old, skilled practitioners
are the most popular and trustworthy. It’s the rookies
and the random lawbreakers that’re the worst grumblers and
whiners, and nothing’s ever good enough for them. But an
old-timer knows that prison’s just one of the risks of the
trade, so there’s no point in being a nuisance either to
himself or to anybody else. But that’s getting away from the
story.
“About five years ago, we started getting reports from
here, there, and everywhere that an unknown breach-ofpromise
man was raising hell all over the Bohemian countryside.
According to descriptions, he was an older man, stout
and bald, with five gold teeth. He went by the names of
Muller, Prochazka, Simek, Sebek, Sinderka, Bilek,
Hromadka, Pivoda, Bergr, Bejcek, Stoces, and who knows
how many others. Well, dammit, the description didn’t check
out with any of the breach-of-promise con men we knew, so
it had to be someone new to the business. Our captain sent
for me and said: ‘Holub, you’re on train duty, so wherever
288
you go, I want you to be on the lookout for a fellow with
five gold teeth.’ Fair enough, I began to look at people’s
teeth on trains, and in two weeks’ time I bagged three
fellows with five gold teeth. They had to show me their I.D.,
of course, and damned if one of them wasn’t a school
inspector and another a member of parliament. Friends,
don’t even ask about the chewing-out I got, first from them
and then from the boss. It made me mad as hell, and I
decided then and there that I was going to get my hands on
the rascal. True, it wasn’t really my case, but my heart was
set on revenge.
“So I went off on my own to see all those hoodwinked
orphans and widows who’d been bilked out of their money
by this gold-toothed crook with his promises of marriage.
You wouldn’t believe the amount of gabbling and sniveling
those poor, abused orphans and widows were capable of.
But at least they all agreed that he was a solid, well-spoken
gentleman and that he had gold teeth and that he showed a
fit and proper enthusiasm for family life. But not a one of
them had even taken his fingerprints — it’s shocking, really,
how naive and trusting these females are. The eleventh
victim — that was at Kamenice — told me in tears that the
gentleman had been to see her three times. He always
arrived by train about ten-thirty in the morning, and when
he’d left for the last time, with her money in his pocket,
he’d looked at the numbers on her little house and said in
surprise: ‘Why, look at that, Miss Marenka, it must be God’s
own will that we’re going to get married. Your house number
is 618, and I always take the 6:18 train when I come to
see you. Isn’t that a good sign?’ — When I heard that, I
said, ‘Miss, it’s a very good sign indeed.’ And I immediately
pulled out the timetable and looked for the station where a
train leaving at 6:18 connected with the train that got into
Kamenice at 10:35. When I’d checked everything out and
matched it all up, I saw that most likely he’d taken the train
from Bystrice-Novoves. A railway detective, you know, has
289
to be up to speed on trains.
“Needless to say, on my next day off I went to Bystrice-
Novoves and asked if there might be a stout gentleman with
a lot of gold in his mouth that traveled from that station
often enough for them to notice. ‘There is,’ said the
stationmaster, ‘and it’s Mr. Lacina, a commercial traveler
who lives down that street. He came back here from somewhere
only yesterday evening.’ So off I went to find this Mr.
Lacina. A tidy, spick-and-span little woman came to the
door, and I asked her, ‘Does Mr. Lacina live here?’ ‘That’s
my husband,’ she said, ‘but he’s taking a nap after lunch
right now.’ ‘No matter,’ I said, and in I went. On the sofa
lay a man in his shirt sleeves, and when he saw me he said,
‘Well, if it isn’t Mr. Holub. Give him a chair, Ma.’
“At that moment all my anger vanished. Why, it was
Plichta, the old sweepstakes grifter, you know, the one who
pulled off all those lottery scams. He’d already been behind
bars at least ten times. ‘Greetings, Plichta,’ I said, ‘given up
on lotteries, have you?’
“‘You bet,’ said Plichta, and he sat up on the sofa. ‘The
thing is, Mr. Holub, there’s a whole lot of running around
involved, and I’m not a young man anymore. Fifty-two
years, a man likes to sit in one place. No more of this going
from house to house for me.’
“‘And that’s how come you’re trying your hand at the
old breach-of-promise game, you old phony,’ I said to him.
“Plichta just sighed. ‘Mr. Holub,’ he said, ‘A man’s got
to do something. You know, the last time I was inside, my
teeth rotted on me; I think it was all those beans that did it.
So I had to get ‘em fixed, see. Mr. Holub, you wouldn’t
believe the benefits a man derives from gold teeth. It builds
your confidence, see, and your digestion picks up and you
start putting on weight. The point is, see, folks like us have
to work with what we’ve got.’
“‘And where’s the money?’ I asked him. ‘I’ve got you
down for eleven separate scams, for a net profit of two
290
hundred and sixteen thousand. Where is it?’
“‘But, Mr. Holub,’ said Plichta, ‘all that belongs to my
wife, see. Business is business. I’ve got nothing except what’s
on me: that’s six hundred and fifty in bills, a gold watch,
and my gold teeth. Ma, I’ll be going off to Prague with Mr.
Holub. Mr. Holub, I have some installments to pay on those
teeth, in the amount of three hundred. I’ll just leave it here.’
“‘And you owe your tailor a hundred and fifty,’ his wife
reminded him.
“‘So I do,’ said Plichta. ‘Mr. Holub, I’m a real stickler
when it comes to accuracy. There’s nothing like having
everything shipshape, see. Keep things shipshape and know
what you owe. Once you’re all paid up, you can look people
straight in the eye. It’s all part of the racket, Mr. Holub.
Ma, give my overcoat a quick lick with the brush, so I can
do you proud in Prague. All right, Mr. Holub, we can leave
now.’
“As it turned out, Plichta got five months. Most of
those women, if you please, swore to the jury that they’d
given him the money of their own free will and that they’d
forgiven him for what he’d done. There was only one old
lady who wouldn’t let bygones be bygones, and she was a
rich widow he took for only five thousand.
“Six months later I heard that two more breach-ofpromise
swindles had been pulled off. That’ll be Plichta, I
said to myself, but I didn’t bother doing anything about it,
because I was headed for the train station in Pardubice at
the time. They had a trunkman operating out of there, you
know, one of those fellows that steals luggage from the
platform. And since my family was at a summer cottage in a
village about an hour or so from Pardubice, I’d packed a
little bag for them with some sausages and other kinds of
smoked meat; it’s hard to get things like that in a village,
you know. And on my way to get the connection at
Pardubice, I walked on through the train out of habit. And
in one of the compartments who should I see but Plichta,
291
sitting with an elderly lady and explaining something or
other about what a corrupt place this world is.
“‘Hello, Plichta,’ I said, ‘promising marriage to somebody
again?’
“Plichta turned red and straightaway asked the lady to
excuse him, because he had some business to talk over with
the gentleman. And when he joined me out in the corridor,
he said reproachfully, ‘Mr. Holub, you shouldn’t of done
that to me in front of strangers. All you had to do was wink
and I’d of come on out. What do you want me for?’
“‘We’ve got a couple more cases on our hands, Plichta,’
I told him. ‘But I’ve got something else to do today, so I’ll
hand you over to the federal agents when we get to
Pardubice.’
“‘Look, Mr. Holub, don’t do that to me. I’m used to
you by now, and you know me, too — I’d rather come with
you. Come on, Mr. Holub, just for old times’ sake.’
“‘Can’t be done,’ I said. ‘I’m off to see my family, and
that’s a good hour from Pardubice. What would I do with
you in the meantime?’
“‘I’ll go with you, Mr. Holub,’ Plichta offered. ‘At least
that’ll help pass the time for you on the way.’
“Well, that’s what happened. Plichta came with me, and
after we’d left Pardubice he said, ‘Say, Mr. Holub, I’ll carry
that little bag for you. Look here, Mr. Holub, I’m older than
you are, and when you talk to me in front of other folks in
a policeman-like way, it gives the wrong impression.’
So I introduced him to my wife and sister-in-law as my
old friend Mr. Plichta. Listen, my sister-in-law is a goodlooking
girl of twenty-five, and Plichta talked so nice and
respectfully and gave the children candy — well, to cut a
long story short, after we’d had some coffee Mr. Plichta
proposed that he go for a stroll with the young lady and the
children; and he winked at me as if to say that we men
understand each other and I’d probably want some time
alone with my missus. That’s the sort of gentlemanly person
292
he was. And when they got back an hour later, the children
were hanging on to Mr. Plichta’s hands, my sister-in-law was
blushing like a rose, and when we left she squeezed his hand
for quite a while.
“‘Listen, Plichta,’ I said to him afterwards, ‘what kind
of ideas were you putting into Manicka’s head?’
“‘It always happens like that, Mr. Holub,’ Plichta said
almost sadly. ‘I can’t help it. It’s the teeth that do it. They’re
always getting me in trouble, and that’s a fact. I never flirt
with the ladies, it wouldn’t do for a man of my age; but
that, you see, just attracts them all the more. Sometimes I
think the ladies don’t like me so much for myself as for the
possible pickings, because they take me for a man of means.’
“When we got back to the station at Pardubice, I said
to him, ‘Plichta, I’m going to turn you over to the federal
agents now, because I have to investigate a theft.’
“‘Mr. Holub,’ Plichta begged me, ‘why don’t I just sit
here in the restaurant while you go investigate? I’ll have a
cup of tea and read the newspaper — here’s my money,
fourteen thousand and a bit of change. And I can’t run away
without money — why, I couldn’t even pay my bill.’
“So I let him take a seat in the station restaurant and
went off to do my job. An hour later I glanced through the
window. He was sitting where I’d left him, reading a newspaper
with a gold pince-nez on his nose. Maybe half an
hour after that I was ready, and I went to fetch him. By then
he was sitting at the next table with a strikingly buxom
blonde, scolding the waiter in a very dignified manner for
putting spoiled milk in her coffee. When he saw me, he took
his leave of the woman and came over to where I was
waiting. ‘Mr. Holub,’ he said, ‘couldn’t you give me, say, a
week before you run me in? There’s some business here I’d
like to take care of.’
“‘Very rich?’ I asked him.
“Plichta gestured with his hand. ‘Mr. Holub,’ he whispered,
‘she’s got a factory; and she badly needs an experi293
enced man to advise her now and then. Right now she has
to pay for some kind of new machinery.’
“‘Fancy that,’ says I. ‘Come on, then, I’ll introduce
you.’ And I went over to where she was sitting. ‘Hello there,
Lojzicka,’ I said, ‘still chasing older gentlemen, I see.’
“The blonde turned red to her roots and said, ‘Heaven
help me, Mr. Holub, I didn’t know this gentleman was a
friend of yours.’
“‘Better make yourself scarce,’ I told her. ‘There’s a
certain Mr. Dundr who’d like a word with you. He calls
what you’re up to fraud, you know.’
“Plichta looked miserable. ‘Mr. Holub,’ he said, ‘I’d
never in my born days have believed that she was a swindler,
too!’
“‘She is,’ I told him, ‘and on top of that, she’s no better
than she ought to be. You might as well know, she finagles
elderly gents out of their money with false promises of
marriage.’
“Plichta paled instantly. ‘Downright disgusting,’ he spat,
‘that’s what it is. Catch me trusting women after this! Mr.
Holub, that’s the absolute limit!’
“‘So wait here,’ I told him, ‘and I’ll get you a ticket to
Prague. Second or third class?’
“‘Mr. Holub,’ Plichta protested, ‘that’s a waste of
money. Being as I’m in custody, I get to ride for free, right?
Then let the government pay for it. A man in my position
has to watch every penny.’
“Plichta cursed that woman all the way to Prague; it’s
the deepest moral indignation I’ve ever come across. When
we got off at Prague, Plichta said, ‘Mr. Holub, I know it’ll
be seven months this time, and prison food don’t agree with
me. Look, what I’d really like is one last proper meal. That
fourteen thousand you took was all I got from my last job
— so let me have at least one good dinner out of it. And I’d
like to square accounts for the coffee at your place.’
“So off we went together to one of the better restau294
rants. Plichta ordered pot roast and drank five beers, and I
paid for it out of his stash, while he checked the bill three
times to make sure our waiter hadn’t cheated us.
“‘That’s it, and now off to the station,’ I said.
“‘Just a moment, Mr. Holub,’ said Plichta. ‘I had a lot
of overhead in connection with that last job. There were
four trips there and back at forty-eight apiece, which comes
to three hundred eighty-four.’ Then he put on his pince-nez
and did some calculations on a piece of paper. ‘Then there’s
out-of-pocket expenses, say thirty per day — I have to keep
up appearances, Mr. Holub, it’s all part of my stock in
trade. That’s a hundred and twenty. Then I gave the young
lady a bunch of flowers for thirty-five, that’s just common
courtesy, you know. The engagement ring cost two hundred
and forty — it was just gold-plated, Mr. Holub. If I wasn’t
an honest man, I’d say it was gold and chalk it up at six
hundred, wouldn’t I? Then I bought her a fancy cake for
thirty; after which we have the postage for five letters, at
one each for a total of five, and the ad by which I got
acquainted with her cost me eighty. That comes to a grand
total of eight hundred and ninety-four, Mr. Holub. What you
really ought to do is deduct that amount from the total, and
I’ll leave the money with you for the time being. I like to
keep everything shipshape, Mr. Holub; at the very least we
have to cover expenses. All right, that’s it. We can go now.”
“But when we were in the entryway to police headquarters,
Plichta suddenly thought of something else: ‘Mr. Holub,
I gave the young lady a bottle of perfume, too. So that’s
another twenty to my credit.’
“Then he blew his nose fastidiously and, his mind at
ease, let them take him away.”
295
The Ballad of Juraj Cup
“It really can happen, gentlemen,” said Captain Havelka of
the regional police, “I mean that, sometimes, criminals turn
out to be surprisingly honest and conscientious. I could tell
you about a number of cases that prove the point, but the
strangest is the Juraj Cup case. It happened when I was
stationed way out east in Jasina, in Ruthenia.
“One night in January we were drinking it up at the
Jew’s place; there was a district manager, a railroad superintendent,
and similar sorts of higher-ups taking care of
government business in those remote parts; and, of course,
gypsies. Listen, these gypsies, I don’t know what stock they
come from, but I think it’s the tribe of Ham. When a gypsy
plays the fiddle, coming closer and closer, playing softer and
softer, those wretched devils, when they work their magic on
your ears that way, it’s . . . it’s like . . . it’s like they’re
dragging your soul right out of your body. I’m telling you,
that music of theirs, it’s unearthly, it’s depraved. And when
they got right up next to me I blubbered, I bellowed like a
stag, I rammed my bayonet through the table, I smashed
glasses, I sang and banged my head against the wall, I
wanted to kill someone or make love — gentlemen, that’s
the kind of hell- raising a man gets up to when gypsies cast
a spell on him. And right when I was at my wildest, up
comes the Jew innkeeper to say that some Ruthenian was
waiting for me out in front of the tavern.
“‘Let him wait or let him come back tomorrow,’ I
shouted, ‘I’m weeping for my youth and burying my dreams.
I’m making love to a lady, a noble, beautiful lady — play,
you gypsy thieves, play on and drive the sorrow from my
296
soul’ — Well, that’s the way I was carrying on; you know, it
all goes with the music, the suffering, and that awesome
drinking. About an hour later the innkeeper comes back
again and says the Ruthenian’s still outside there in the
freezing cold, waiting. But I was still weeping for my youth
and hadn’t finished drowning my sorrows in Tokay. So I just
waved my hand like Genghis Khan, as much as to say, it
makes no difference to me, just play on, gypsies. And what
happened after that, believe me, I don’t know, but when I
left the tavern at dawn it was so cold out that the snow
squeaked and tinkled like glass, and there in front of the
place stood the Ruthenian in white bast shoes, white
britches, and white sheepskin. When he saw me, he bowed
to the waist and said something in a hoarse voice.
“‘What do you want, shepherd,’ I say to him, ‘waste my
time and I’ll crack your jaw.’
“‘Your lordship,’ says the Ruthenian, ‘the mayor of
Volova Lehota sent me here. Marina Matejova’s been killed.’
“That sobered me up a bit. Volova Lehota, that was a
village, or rather a lonely little clump of thirty huts, fifteen
miles or so back up in the mountains; in other words, no
pleasure jaunt in winter. ‘For God’s sake,’ I yelled, ‘who
killed her?’
“‘I did, your lordship,’ the Ruthenian said humbly. ‘My
name is Juraj Cup, son of Dmitri Cup.’
“‘And you’re here to give yourself up?’ I fired at him.
“‘The mayor told me to,’ Juraj Cup said resignedly.
‘Juraj, he said, go tell the police you killed Marina
Matejova.’
“‘And why did you kill her?’ I yelled.
“‘God told me to,’ said Juraj, as if it were the most
natural thing in the world. ‘The Lord commanded: kill
Marina Matejova, your beloved sister, by an evil spirit
possessed.’
“‘Damn you,’ I said, ‘how did you get here from Volova
Lehota?’
297
“‘With God’s help,’ Juraj Cup said devoutly. ‘The Lord
protected me so I would not perish in the snow. Praise be to
His name.’
“Listen, if you knew what a blizzard’s like in the
Carpathians; if you knew what it’s like when there’s a good
six feet of snow on the ground; if you could have seen that
poor, puny little fellow Juraj Cup and how he’d waited for
six hours in front of the tavern in that terrible cold to turn
himself in for murdering Marina Matejova, God’s unworthy
handmaiden, I don’t know what you would have done. But
what I did was cross myself, and Juraj Cup crossed himself,
and then I arrested him. The next thing I did was wash my
face in the snow and strap on my skis and, along with an
officer named Kroupa, I set off into the mountains for
Volova Lehota. And if the commander-in-chief of the regional
police himself had stopped me and said: Havelka,
you’re crazy, you won’t get anywhere, you’re putting your
life in jeopardy in weather like this, I’d have saluted him
and said: With all due respect, sir, the Lord commanded it.
And I’d have gone. And Kroupa would’ve, too, because he’s
from Zizkov; and I never met a man from Zizkov who
didn’t want to jump right in when there’s some kind of
grandstanding or harebrained caper afoot. So we left.
“I’m not going to describe that trip of ours. I’ll only tell
you that, by the end of it, Kroupa was sobbing like a child
with fear and exhaustion, and that twenty times we told
ourselves we were done for and couldn’t last a minute
longer. And that it took us eleven hours, from one night to
the next, to go those fifteen miles. I’m only saying this so
you’ll get an idea of how it was. A policeman’s got the
constitution of a horse, gentlemen, but when he falls down
in the snow and whimpers that he can’t go on, well, it
simply means there’s no way to describe what it was like.
But I kept on walking as if in a dream, and kept on telling
myself that Juraj Cup had made it, Juraj Cup, a little pocketknife
of a man, and on top of that he’d waited six hours
298
in front of the tavern in the freezing cold, because the mayor
had told him to — Juraj Cup in his wet bast shoes, Juraj
Cup in the blizzard, Juraj Cup in God’s hands. Listen, if you
saw a stone falling up instead of down, you’d call it a
miracle. But that journey Juraj Cup made to give himself up,
nobody calls that a miracle; and yet it was a bigger phenomenon,
and a more fearsome power at work, than a stone
that’s falling up. Wait, let me speak. What I’m saying is, if
you want to see miracles, keep your eye on people, not
stones.
“Well, when we got to Volova Lehota we were staggering
like shadows, more dead than alive. We banged on the
mayor’s door, but everyone was asleep. Then the mayor, a
bearded giant of a man, crept out with a rifle in his hands,
and when he saw us he knelt down and unfastened our skis,
but he never uttered a word. When I think back on what
happened, it’s as if I’m looking at a series of strange paintings,
simple and solemn images: the mayor leading us
without a word into one of the huts; two candles burning in
the room, a woman in black kneeling before an ikon, on a
bed the body of Marina Matejova in a white shift, her
throat cut clear to the bone — it was a horrible and yet
such an oddly clean stroke, like when a butcher splits a
suckling pig in two. And the face was such an eerie white,
the white you only see in people who’ve been drained of
their last drop of blood.
“Then, still without a word, the mayor led us back to
his place. By now, eleven men in fleece coats were waiting
there — I don’t know if you have any idea how those
sheepskins smell: there’s something sort of stifling and Old
Testament-like about them. The mayor sat us down at the
table, cleared his throat, bowed, and said, ‘In God’s name,
we bring an accusation before you in the death of His
servant Marina Matejova. May the Lord have mercy on
her!’
“‘Amen,’ the eleven countrymen said, and they crossed
299
themselves.
“And then the mayor began: Two nights ago he had
heard someone scratching outside, scratching softly at the
door. He thought it was a fox, and he took his gun and
went to open the door. On the doorstep lay a woman. It was
Marina Matejova with her throat slit. Because her vocal
cords were cut, she was dumb.
“The mayor carried Marina into his hut and laid her on
the bed. Then he ordered a shepherd to blow his horn and
summon all the peasants of Volova Lehota. When they had
gathered, he turned to Marina and said, ‘Marina Matejova,
before you die, bear witness to who killed you. Marina
Matejova, did I kill you?’
“Marina could not shake her head; but she closed her
eyes.
“‘Marina, was it this man here, your neighbor Vlaho,
son of Vasil?’
“Marina closed her anguished eyes.
“‘Marina Matejova, was it this shepherd here, Kohut,
known as Vanka? Was it this one here, who is Martin
Dudas, your neighbor? — Marina, was it this one, Baran,
known as Sandor? — Marina, was it the one who is standing
here, Andrej Vorobec? — Marina Matejova, was it
Klimko Bezuchy, who is standing before you? Marina, was it
this man, Stepan Bobot? — Marina, was the one who killed
you Tatka, the gamekeeper, son of Mihal Tatka? Marina — ‘
“At that moment the door opened and in came Juraj
Cup, the brother of Marina Matejova. Marina shuddered
and her eyes grew wild with fright.
“‘Marina,’ the mayor persisted, ‘who killed you? Was it
this one here, Fodor, whose name is Terentik?’
“But Marina no longer responded. ‘Pray,’ said Juraj
Cup, and all the peasants fell to their knees. At length the
mayor arose and said, ‘Let the women in!’
“‘Not yet,’ said old Dudas. ‘Marina Matejova, the
servant of God, now no more, in the name of God give a
300
sign: did Duro the shepherd kill you?’
“There was silence.
“‘Marina Matejova, whose soul is with the Lord, did
Toth Ivan, son of Ivan, kill you?’
“No one breathed.
“‘Marina Matejova, in the name of God, then it was
your own brother who killed you, Juraj Cup?’
“‘I killed her,’ said Juraj Cup. ‘The Lord commanded
me: kill Marina, by an evil spirit possessed.’
“‘Close her eyes,’ ordered the mayor. ‘Juraj, you will go
now to Jasina and present yourself before the police. You
will tell them: I killed Marina Matejova. Until that time
neither will you sit nor will you eat. Go, Juraj!’ — Then he
opened the door and let the women into the hut to lament
for the dead.
“Listen, I don’t know whether it was those sheepskins
or fatigue or because there was such strange beauty or
dignity in what I had seen and heard, but I had to go
outside, into the bitter cold, because my head was in a
whirl. It’s the truth, something rose up inside me as if telling
me to stand up and say: God’s people, God’s people! We will
judge Juraj Cup in accordance with earthly codes, but within
you is the law of God. — And I would have bowed from the
waist before them. But that’s not fitting for a policeman, and
that’s why I went outside and stayed there, swearing, all
alone, until I recovered my policeman’s soul again.
“You know, police work is a rough, hard business. In
the morning I ransacked Juraj Cup’s hut and found the
dollar bills that the dead Marina’s husband had been sending
her from America. Of course I had to report it, and those
lawyers ran with it and made a case for robbery and murder.
Juraj Cup got the rope; but nobody can convince me that he
made that journey on human strength alone. I know a lot
about human strength, you know. But I think I know a bit
about God’s judgment, too.”
301
The Tale of the Missing Leg
“A lot of people,” Mr. Tymich said in response, “wouldn’t
believe what a person will put up with at times. Let me tell
you about something that happened during the war, when I
was serving with the Thirty-fifth. We had one soldier there
named Dynda or Otahal or Peterka or something, but I’ll
call him Pepek. He was a good man otherwise, but such a
simpleton you could cry. Anyway, as long as they had us
running around in drill formation he was fine, he took it
like a lamb. But when they sent us up to the front, it was at
Cracow then, they picked some damfool spot the Russian
artillery was targeting that very moment. Pepek just gaped,
that’s all. But when he came to this horse with its belly
ripped open and the horse still snorting and trying to get up,
Pepek turned white, slammed down his cap, said a few
unkind things about His Majesty, threw his rifle and rucksack
on the ground, and headed for home.
“How he made it over those three hundred or so miles,
I couldn’t tell you to save my soul. But one night there he
was, knocking on the door of his little farmhouse and saying
to his wife, ‘It’s me, Ma, and I’m not going back there, so it
looks like I’m done for. I’m a deserter.’ After they had a
good cry together, his wife says, ‘Pepek, I’m not going to
bawl you out, I’m going to hide you in the dung heap.
Nobody’ll look for you there.’ So she buries him in the
manure pile and covers it over with boards, and Pepek sat in
that stinkpit for five months. Let me tell you, not even a
martyr to the faith could’ve stood something like that. Then
some old biddy of a neighbor tipped off the authorities after
a quarrel over a hen, and they came to haul Pepek out of
302
the dung. Listen, they had to buy about thirty feet of rope
so they wouldn’t have to smell him when they brought him
into town all trussed up.
“After Pepek had aired out a little, they took him
before a military court. The hearing officer was a man
named Dillinger. Some say he was a fine man and others
that he was a dirty dog, but how that man could swear —
well, there’s no denying it, under the Austrians we all
learned how to swear! It got to be kind of an old tradition.
These days nobody can do a decent job of cussing out;
insulting, though, we’re sure good at that. Anyway, this
hearing officer, Dillinger, stood Pepek out in the courtyard
and tried his case from the window; he wouldn’t let him
come any closer. Well, things were looking bad for Pepek: an
army deserter, you know; you can get the firing squad for
that, and not even God Himself can help you. And this
Dillinger wasn’t going to waste his precious time on anybody
— I guess he was just a dirty dog after all. But when he was
ready to pronounce sentence, Dillinger yelled from the
window, ‘So what about it, Pepek, all that time you were
buried there, didn’t you get a good night’s sleep now and
then with your old lady?’
“Pepek shifted from one leg to the other in embarrassment
and then suddenly burst out, his face all red: ‘’Respectfully
reporting, sir, now and then, sure. Elsewise I couldn’t
have done it.’
“At that Dillinger shut the window and said, ‘Jesus!’
After a moment he just shook his head and quick-stepped
around the room till he’d recovered, and then he said, ‘They
can pension me off, but I’m not sentencing this fellow to
death. For his wife’s sake alone, I just can’t do it. Ugh and
phew! There’s married love for you!’ And somehow or other
he got the sentence knocked down to three years’ imprisonment.
“Pepek’s prison assignment was to tend the warden’s
garden, and afterwards the warden said that never in his life
303
did he have such big, beautiful vegetables as when Pepek
was cultivating the crop. ‘The devil only knows,’ the warden
said, ‘how he got them to grow so good.’”
* * *
“Well,” said Mr. Kral, “all kinds of strange things happened
during the war, you know. And if you made a collection of
everything that people did so they wouldn’t have to fight for
Austria, you’d get more books out of it than the Jesuits
came up with for the Acta Sanctorum. I’ve got a nephew,
Lojzik, who has a bakery in Radlice, and when they took
him away in the war he said to me, ‘Uncle, I can tell you
straight off, they’re not sending me to the front. I’d chop off
my leg before I’d give them a hand, those German bastards.’
“Well, Lojzik was a clever lad, and all the while those
rookies were drilling with their rifles, he was nearly bending
backwards with enthusiasm, so much so that his superiors
saw him as a future hero, or at any rate the next to get his
corporal’s stripes. But when he got wind they were going to
be sent to the front in a couple of days, he faked a fever,
grabbed the right side of his belly, and started moaning
something awful. So they took him off to the hospital and
yanked out his appendix. Lojzik made sure the incision took
a long time to close, but after about six weeks it healed up
fairly well no matter what he did to it, and still the war
wasn’t over. That’s when I visited him in the hospital.
‘Uncle,’ says Lojzik, ‘not even my drill sergeant can get me
out of this one. I’m just waiting any minute now for them to
muster me out of here.’
“The medical chief-of-staff at the time was the infamous
Dr. Oberhuber. It turned out later that the fellow was a
complete lunatic. But you know, the army’s the army, and if
you stuck gold stars on a warthog, he’d be a general. As you
can imagine, they were all scared of Oberhuber, because all
he ever did was run around to the hospitals screaming, ‘Off
304
to the front!’ at everybody, even if the soldier had a certified
case of TB or bullet holes in his spine, and no one could
answer back. He wouldn’t even look at the chart over a sick
man’s bed, just peer at him from a distance and scream,
‘Frontdiensttauglich! Sofort einrucken!’ And all the saints in
heaven couldn’t help you then.
“So one day this Oberhuber came to inspect the
hospital where Lojzik was waiting for the inevitable. The
moment they heard the storm brewing down at the gate, all
the patients except the ones who were already dead had to
stand at attention by their beds to receive his High-and-
Mightiness in the proper manner. The thing is, the waiting
went on for quite a while. So Lojzik, just to get more
comfortable, bent one leg, rested his knee on the hospital
bed, and stood there on his other leg. At that very moment
Oberhuber pushed his way into the ward, purple with rage,
and yelled right from the door, ‘Off to the front! That man,
too! Tauglich!’ — Then he took a look at Lojzik and how he
was standing there on one leg, and he got even more purple
in the face. ‘Einbeinig!’ he screamed. ‘Sofort send him home!
Himmel, why do you keep here a one-legged man? Is this a
pigsty for cripples? Get him out of here! You slackers, for
that I send you all to the front!’ The noncoms, ghostly pale,
stammered that steps would be taken at once; but
Oberhuber was already screaming at the next bed, ‘Sofort to
the front!’ to a new recruit who’d just been operated on the
day before.
“Within the hour, Lojzik, his release papers personally
signed by Oberhuber himself, was discharged from the
hospital and sent home as a one-legged disabled veteran.
Well, Lojzik was a very practical young man. He immediately
put in a request that, as a permanent cripple, he be
struck from the roll of military conscripts and granted a
disability pension, because as a baker he needed both legs —
even if, as they say about bakers, their legs’re crooked. In
other words, with only one officially- certified leg he
305
couldn’t practice his trade. After the appropriate official
delay, he received notice that he was being discharged as
forty-five-percent disabled, in consequence of which he was
eligible to draw thus-and-so-much money in disability pay
per month. So far so good, but this is where the story of the
missing leg really begins.
“From that time on, Lojzik drew his disability pay,
helped his dad in the bakery, and even got married. Only
sometimes he noticed that he was limping or hobbling just a
bit on the leg that Oberhuber had officially certified as
missing; but he was glad that at least it made him look like
he might have an artificial leg. Then the war ended and the
Republic came along; but Lojzik, being so orderly and
thorough, went right on drawing his disability pay.
“Then one day he came to see me, and it was pretty
clear that he had some sort of worry on his mind. ‘Uncle,’
he bursts out after a minute, ‘it seems to me this leg of mine
is getting shorter or shriveled up somehow.’ And he pulled
up his pants leg and showed me his leg. It was thin as a
stick. ‘Uncle,’ he says, ‘I’m scared I’m going to lose this leg
after all.’
“‘So take it to the doctor, you blockhead,’ I tell him.
“‘Uncle,’ sighs Lojzik, ‘I don’t think it’s some kind of
disease. I think maybe it’s because I’m not supposed to have
this leg. I mean, I’ve got it written down in black and white
that my right leg up to the knee is gone — don’t you think
that’s why it’s shriveling up on me?’
“After a time he came to see me again — by then he
was already leaning on a cane. ‘Uncle,’ he says in agony,
‘I’m a cripple. I can’t even put any weight on this leg anymore.
Doctor says it’s atrophy of the muscles and it’s probably
something to do with nerves, so he’s sending me off to
the mineral baths, but it seems to me he doesn’t really
believe it’ll help. Uncle, feel how my leg’s all cold, just like it
was dead. Doctor says it’s bad circulation — don’t you think
that what it’s doing is just rotting away?’
306
“‘Listen, Lojzik,’ I tell him, ‘I’m going to give you some
good advice: report your leg to the authorities and ask them
to cross you off the list as a one-legged man. Then I think
your leg’ll get better.’
“‘But, Uncle,’ Lojzik objects, ‘then they’ll say I took
that disability pay under false pretenses and that I cheated
the state out of a whole pile of money. I’ll have to pay it all
back for sure!’
“‘Then keep the money, you cheapskate baker,’ I tell
him, ‘but you’ll lose your leg. Just don’t come whining to me
afterwards.’
“A week later he was back at my place again. ‘Uncle,’
he rattles off straight from the doorway, ‘they don’t want to
officially recognize my leg at all. They say it’s all shriveled
up, so it’s no good anyway. Now what do I do?’
“You wouldn’t believe the amount of running around it
took before they officially recognized that Lojzik had two
legs. And you can bet he had to settle accounts afterwards
for cheating the state over the disability pay; they even
prosecuted him for dodging his military obligations. Poor
Lojzik was racing around from office to office, but the
whole time his leg was getting stronger and stronger. Maybe
it was because of all the running around he had to do, but
my guess is it’s because he finally got official recognition.
After all, an official ruling like that conveys a ton of authority.
But what I really think is that his leg shriveled up on
him because what he did was wrong. He wasn’t playing fair,
and you pay for that. I’m telling you, a clear conscience is
the best health care there is. And if people were fair and
honest, maybe they wouldn’t even have to die.”
307
Vertigo
“Conscience,” said Mr. Lacina, “is a word that’s no longer
used; nowadays it’s called repression, but it’s six of one and
half-a-dozen of the other. I don’t know if any of you recall
that case involving Gierke, the industrialist. He was extremely
rich and a very high-class person, tall and strong as
a column. They said he was a widower, but other than that,
nobody knew anything about him, he had such a reserved
nature. Anyway, when he was well over forty he fell in love
with the prettiest young thing, she was seventeen years old
and so beautiful it made you catch your breath; real beauty
like that somehow squeezes your heart with compassion or
tenderness or something. And Gierke married the girl,
because he was the great and wealthy Gierke.
“They went to Italy for their honeymoon, and here’s
what happened while they were there: They climbed up the
famous campanile in Venice, and when Gierke looked down
— they say it’s a very fine view — he grew pale, turned
toward his young wife, and collapsed like a felled tree. From
that time on he became more reserved than ever. He tried
very hard to make it seem that nothing was wrong with
him, but there was this anxious, desperate look in his eyes.
His wife was terribly frightened, as you can imagine, and
she took him back home. They had a beautiful house overlooking
the public gardens, and that’s where Gierke’s eccentricity
came to light; he’d go from window to window,
making sure they were tightly locked, and he’d hardly sit
down before jumping up again to make sure some other
window was locked. He’d even get up during the night and
wander over the whole house — in reply to questions, he’d
308
only mutter that he had this damned vertigo and that he
wanted to shut the windows so he wouldn’t fall out of them.
So then his wife had gratings fastened over all the windows,
to relieve him from this ceaseless anxiety. This served the
purpose for a few days and Gierke calmed down a bit, but
then he began running from window to window again,
shaking the gratings to make sure they were firmly in place.
Then steel shutters were added, and they lived behind them
like shut-ins. This quieted Gierke somewhat, but then the
vertigo appeared again when he had to use the stairs. They
had to guide him up and down the stairs and hold onto him
as if he were lame, and meanwhile he’d be trembling like a
leaf, all drenched with sweat. Sometimes, in fact, he had to
sit down in the middle of the staircase and he’d burst into a
fit of sobbing — that’s how badly frightened he was.
“Of course, they’d begun consulting every doctor they
could find and, as is often the case, one sawbones said that
the attacks were due to overwork, a second that it was some
kind of inner-ear disorder of the labyrinth, a third that the
problem was caused by constipation, and a fourth that it
resulted from a lack of blood in the brain. Listen, it’s my
observation that as soon as someone becomes a prominent
expert, the first thing that springs forth from him, on account
of some sort of internal process, is a point of view.
Then what a specialist like that says is, ‘My dear colleague,
from my point of view, it is of course thus-and-such.’ And
another specialist objects, ‘Yes, my dear colleague, but from
my point of view the situation is diametrically opposite.’
What I think is, points of view ought to be left at the door,
like hats and walking sticks. As soon as you turn a man
with a point of view loose anywhere, he’s bound to get up
to some kind of mischief or at the very least disagree with
everybody else. But to get back to Gierke, every month he
was tortured and treated by some other prominent specialist
according to some totally different method. Gierke was a
huge mountain of a man and he could take it. But the time
309
came when he couldn’t get up out of his armchair, because
he’d have an attack of vertigo as soon as he looked down at
the ground, and so he just stared into the darkness, without
speaking or moving, and sometimes he’d shake all over —
when he was sobbing.
“Then some new doctor, a neurologist named Spitz,
began working miracles. This Dr. Spitz had set himself up as
someone who treated repression. What I mean is, he said
that almost all of us, deep in our subconscious, have all
kinds of horrible thoughts or memories or cravings that we
repress because we’re scared of them; and these repressions
create a lot of turmoil and confusion inside us and what
you’d call nervous breakdowns. And when a doctor who
knows what he’s doing pokes around and drags this repression
right out into God’s own daylight, the patient feels
relieved and is all right again. This sort of psychoanalytical
quack has to gain the complete confidence of the patient in
question and haul everything imaginable out of his brain:
what he dreams about at night, what he remembers about
his childhood, and things like that. And afterwards, when it’s
all over, he tells him: Well, my good man, years ago you had
such-and-such an experience (usually it’s something pretty
awful) and it’s been pressing on your subconscious — it’s
what we call a psychical trauma; now it’s out in the open,
abracadabra, phoney-baloney, and you’re cured. That’s the
sort of sorcery it is.
“I’m telling you, this Dr. Spitz really worked magic.
You wouldn’t believe how many repressions rich people
have; poor people as a rule don’t worry that much about
them. In short, Dr. Spitz had a fabulous clientele. So after all
the other medical gurus in turn had done what they could
for Gierke, Dr. Spitz was called in. And Dr. Spitz declared
that the vertigo attacks were neurotic in origin and that he,
Hugo Spitz, guaranteed that he’d rid the patient of them
forever. Well and good. But the only thing was that Gierke,
to put it mildly, was not exactly talkative. No matter what
310
Dr. Spitz asked him about, Gierke would barely mumble in
reply, after which he’d fall completely silent and, eventually,
show Spitz the door. Dr. Spitz was in despair; with an
important patient like that, you know, it’s a question of
prestige. Besides which, it was a particularly attractive and
difficult case of nervous breakdown. And on top of that,
Gierke’s wife, Irma, was a very beautiful and unhappy
woman. As a result, Dr. Spitz put everything else aside.
Either I track down Gierke’s repression, he growled, or I
drop medicine and get a job at Lobl’s as a salesclerk.
“What he did was turn to a new psychoanalytical
method. First of all, he identified all of Gierke’s aunts,
cousins, brothers-in-law, and other elderly kin, both near
and distant, who were still alive; then he set out to gain
their confidence — the main thing this kind of doctor has to
learn is how to listen patiently. These relatives were thrilled
to meet such a charming and attentive gentleman as Dr.
Spitz. But in the long run, Spitz got seriously down to
business and turned to a certain private investigating firm,
which sent out two reliable people somewhere or other.
When the two of them returned, Dr. Spitz paid them for
their trouble and went straight to Mr. Gierke. Gierke was
sitting in semi-darkness in his armchair, now barely capable
of moving.
“‘Mr. Gierke,’ said Dr. Spitz, ‘I’m not going to impose
on you; you don’t have to say a single word. I won’t ask
you about anything. All I want to do is to release you from
what is causing your vertigo. You have pushed it down into
your subconscious, but this repression is so strong that it
produces serious disorders — ‘
“‘I didn’t send for you, Doctor,’ Gierke interrupted him
hoarsely, and he reached out his hand toward the bell.
“‘I know,’ said Dr. Spitz, ‘but wait just a moment.
When you first had that attack of vertigo on the campanile
at Venice, try to remember, sir, just try to remember what
you felt at the time.’
311
“Gierke sat there rigidly with his finger on the bell.
“‘What you felt,’ continued Dr. Spitz, ‘what you felt
was a terrifying, maniacal urge to hurl your beautiful young
wife from the bell tower. But because you loved her beyond
measure, a conflict raged within you and vented itself in the
form of psychical shock. You collapsed with vertigo — ‘
“There was silence, but the hand stretched toward the
bell suddenly dropped to one side.
“‘From that moment on,’ said Dr. Spitz, ‘this vertigo,
this dreadful fear of the abyss, has never left you. From that
moment on, you have locked the windows and been unable
to look down from heights, because inside you there was
always the horrifying thought that you might push your
wife, Irma, into the depths below — ‘
“From Gierke’s armchair came an inhuman groan.
“‘Yes,’ continued Dr. Spitz, ‘but now, sir, there is the
question of where this obsessive tendency came from. Mr.
Gierke, you were first married eighteen years ago. Mr.
Gierke, your first wife died on a walking tour of the Alps.
She fell from a precipice while climbing the Hohe Wand, and
you inherited her estate.’
“The only sound that could be heard was Gierke’s
harsh, rapid breathing.
“‘Gierke,’ cried Dr. Spitz, ‘you murdered your first wife.
You pushed her over the precipice. And that is why, listen to
me, that is why you believe that you will kill your second
wife as well, the one you truly love. That is why you’re
afraid of heights; that is why you suffer from vertigo — ‘
“‘Doctor,’ howled the man in the armchair, ‘doctor,
what am I to do? What can I possibly do about it?’
“Dr. Spitz grew immensely sad. ‘Sir,’ he said, ‘if I were
a religious man, I would advise you to take your punishment,
so that God may have mercy on your soul. But we
doctors don’t ordinarily believe in God. You yourself will
have to decide what to do; but from a medical point of
view, it’s obvious that you’ve recovered. Stand up, Mr.
312
Gierke!’
“Gierke stood, white as a sheet.
“‘Tell me,’ asked Dr. Spitz, ‘do you feel dizzy?’
“Gierke shook his head.
“‘There you have it,’ said Dr. Spitz, catching his breath
in relief. ‘Now the other symptoms will disappear, too. That
vertigo was only from your subconsciously repressed
thoughts. Now, since we have released them, all will be well.
Can you look out the window? Excellent! It’s as if all your
worries had vanished, isn’t it? Not a hint of vertigo, right?
Mr. Gierke, you are the finest case I’ve ever had!’ Dr. Spitz
rubbed his hands together with delight. ‘Completely cured!
May I call Mrs. Gierke? No? Aha, you want to surprise her
yourself — good heavens, won’t she be pleased when she
sees you walking! — So you see, Mr. Gierke, what miracles
science can perform!’ In his sheer joy at his success he could
have babbled on for another two hours, but he saw that
Gierke needed rest; therefore he wrote out a prescription for
a sedative and took his leave.
“‘I’ll escort you, doctor,’ said Gierke politely, and he
accompanied the doctor to the head of the stairs. ‘That’s
strange,’ he said, ‘not a trace of vertigo, not a trace — ‘
“‘Wonderful,’ Dr. Spitz cried out enthusiastically. ‘So
you feel quite well, do you?’
“‘Completely well,’ Gierke said softly, and he watched
the doctor descend. And after the front door had slammed
behind Dr. Spitz, there was another heavy thud. A moment
later they found Gierke’s body at the bottom of the stairs.
He was dead, his body broken in several places from having
struck the banisters of the staircase as he fell.
“When they notified Dr. Spitz, he whistled and a very
odd expression crossed his face. Then he took the book in
which he logged the names of his patients, and opposite
Gierke’s name he merely wrote the date and a single word:
Suicidium. And as you know, Mr. Taussig, that means
suicide.”
313
The Confession
“Repression,” mused Father Voves, the priest at St.
Matthew’s. “Listen, treating repression is one of the oldest
human experiences; except that our Holy Church calls the
medicine sacramentum sanctae confessionis. When something
is pressing on your soul, when there’s something you’re
ashamed of, go, wretched sinner, to holy confession and rid
yourself of the filth you’re carrying around inside! Only we
don’t call it treating nervous breakdowns, we call it contrition,
repentance, and the absolution of sins.
“I’ll tell you something that happened a number of
years ago. It was a brutally hot summer day, and so I’d
stayed inside my little church — you know, it’s always
seemed to me that these Evangelicals could only have got
their start in the northern countries, where you can’t get
warm even in the summertime. In a church like ours, the
Catholic Church, you’ve got something going on all the
livelong day — mass, devotions, vespers or, if nothing else,
the paintings and statues; you can drop by anytime you like,
cool off, and meditate — but it helps when it’s hot as an
oven outside. That’s why you have the dissenters in the cold
and inhospitable regions and us Catholics in the warmer
climes; it’s probably the shade and coolness in God’s holy
cathedrals that does it. Well, as I was saying, it was a
broiling hot day; when I entered the church, I felt something
beautiful and peaceful wafting gently toward me. And then
the sacristan came up and told me that a man had been
waiting there for more than an hour for someone to hear his
confession.
“Well, of course, that happens often enough; so I
314
fetched my surplice from the sacristy and sat myself down in
the confessional. The sacristan brought the penitent over —
he was an older, rather well-dressed man, he looked like a
salesman or a real estate agent, and his face was pale and
somewhat swollen. He knelt at the confessional and remained
silent.
“‘Now then,’ I said to encourage him, ‘say after me: I, a
miserable sinner, do confess and acknowledge unto Almighty
God — ’
“‘No,’ the man blurted out, ‘I say it differently. Let me
do it my way. I have to do it differently.’ Suddenly his chin
began to tremble and sweat broke out on his forehead. And
like a bolt out of the blue I had this peculiar and revolting
feeling of disgust — Only once before had I ever been
shaken like that, and that was at the exhumation of a corpse
which was . . . which was in a state of decomposition; I’m
not going to tell you, gentlemen, what that was like.
“‘For heaven’s sake, what’s wrong?’ I called out, thoroughly
frightened.
“‘Just a moment — just a moment,’ the man shuddered.
He gave a deep sigh, blew his nose loudly, and said, ‘It’s all
right now. I’m ready to begin, Father. It was twelve years
ago — ’
“I won’t tell you what I heard. To begin with, of
course, there’s the seal of confession; and in the second
place, the act was so ghastly, so sickening and bestial, that
— well, it simply cannot be said aloud. And that man
spurted it all out in such gruesome detail — and he left
nothing to the imagination, nothing whatsoever! I thought
I’d have to run out of the confessional, that I’d have to stop
up my ears or I don’t know what. I crammed my surplice
into my mouth to keep from crying out in horror.
“‘There, it’s out now,’ the man said with satisfaction,
and he blew his nose with relief. ‘My thanks, Father.’
“‘Wait,’ I cried, ‘what about repentance?’
“‘Not on your life,’ said the man, and he looked at me
315
through the little window almost confidentially. ‘Father, I
don’t believe in anything at all. I only came here to get this
off my chest. You know, when I haven’t talked about . . .
about that business for a while . . . then I see right there in
front of me . . . everything . . . and I can’t sleep, I can’t
even close my eyes — — And when that happens, it has to
come out, I have to tell someone about it. And that’s what
you’re here for, that’s your job and you can’t tell anyone else
because it’s under the seal of confession. As for absolution, I
don’t give a rap about that; it doesn’t mean a thing when
you’re not a believer. Many thanks, Father. Best regards.’ —
And before I could recover from the shock, he drifted
jauntily out of the church.
“About a year later he turned up again. He buttonholed
me in front of the church, looking pale and extremely
humble. ‘Father,’ he stammered, ‘may I confess to you?’
“‘Look,’ I told him, ‘without repentance it can’t be
done, and that’s all there is to it. If you can’t repent, we
can’t do business.’
“‘My God,’ the man sighed miserably, ‘that’s what every
priest tells me now! Not a one of them will hear my confession,
and I need it so badly — Look, Your Reverence, what
difference does it make to you if I — if just once more I
could — ’
“With that his lips began to tremble as before. ‘Nothing
doing,’ I shouted, ‘unless you tell me in the presence of a
layman!’
“‘Sure,’ wailed the man, ‘and then the layman would
turn me in! The hell with you,’ he yelled, painfully offended,
and then he ran off. And it’s a funny thing, but even from
the back you could see how desperate he was —
“Since that time I’ve never laid eyes on him again.”
“Your Reverence,” said Dr. Baum, the lawyer, “your story
isn’t over yet. One day — it’s been a few years now — a
316
fellow with a pale and swollen face came to my office — to
tell the truth, I didn’t much like the looks of him. When I’d
seated him and asked what had brought him there, the man
started off like this: ‘Look, sir, if a client consults you in
confidence and reveals to you that he’s, say, committed some
offense, then — ’
“‘ — then obviously,’ I told him, ‘I wouldn’t be allowed
to use it against him. If I did, there’d be a serious disciplinary
hearing, if not worse.’
“‘Good,’ the man said with a sigh of relief. ‘There’s
something I have to tell you. Fourteen years ago — ‘ and
then, Your Reverence, I must have heard the same thing you
did then.”
“Don’t say it,” Father Voves interrupted him.
“It never occurred to me,” muttered Dr. Baum. “You
know, it was a thoroughly ugly affair. And that fellow just
went on spewing it out as if he were choking; sweat pouring
off of him, livid, his eyes closed. . . . It seemed as if he were
vomiting, psychologically speaking. Then he paused and
wiped his lips with his handkerchief.
“‘For God’s sake,’ I told him, ‘there’s nothing I can do
about this! But if you want my most sincere advice — ‘
“‘No,’ the odd creature gasped, ‘I don’t want any
advice. I only came here to tell you what I did. But remember,’
he added almost savagely, ‘you can’t use it against me!’
Then he stood up and said, quite calmly, ‘So how much do I
owe you, sir?’
“‘Fifty,’ I said, feeling miserable; and he took out a fifty,
said good day, and left.
“I’d like to know how many lawyers in Prague he called
on like that, but he never paid me a second visit.”
“That’s still not the end of the story,” remarked Dr. Vitasek.
“Some years ago, when I was a doing my residency, they
brought in a man with that same kind of pale and swollen
317
face; his legs were bloated like tubs, he was having convulsions,
and he had difficulty breathing. In short, a classic case
of kidney failure, straight out of a medical text. Needless to
say, there was no help for him. One night the nurse notified
me that the patient with kidney failure in ward seven was
starting to have convulsions again. So I go to him, and I see
the poor man gasping for breath, sweating like the devil, his
eyes panicky with terror — the death agonies in kidney
failure are appalling.
“‘Look, old fellow,’ I said, ‘I’ll give you an injection and
you’ll feel better again.’
“The patient shook his head. ‘Doctor,’ he managed to
say, ‘I . . . there’s something I have to tell you . . . But send
that woman away!’
“I’d rather have given him an injection of morphine,
but when I saw those eyes of his, I sent the nurse on her
way. ‘Out with it then, my good fellow,’ I said, ‘but afterwards
you need to get some sleep.’
“‘Doctor,’ the man groaned, and there was such insane
fear in his eyes that I can’t describe it, ‘Doctor, I can’t — I
keep seeing this — I can’t sleep, I have to tell you — ‘
“And then, amidst gasps and convulsions, it all came
out. I tell you, I have never to this day heard anything like
it.”
“Hm, hm,” coughed the lawyer Baum.
“Don’t worry,” said Dr. Vitasek, “I’m not going to tell
it; that’s privileged information between doctor and patient.
Afterwards he lay there like a wet rag, utterly exhausted.
You know, I couldn’t give him absolution, Your Reverence,
or any kind of wise counsel. But I did give him two shots of
morphine, and when he woke up, another, and then once
again, until he didn’t wake up anymore. You might say I
gave him a helping hand.”
“Amen,” said Father Voves, and he thought for a
moment. “That was kind of you,” he added softly; “at least
he’s no longer suffering.”
318
A Lyrical Thief
“Sometimes it happens the other way around,” Mr. Zach,
the editor, broke in after an appropriate silence. “Sometimes
you really don’t know if it’s a bad conscience or nothing but
bragging and showing off. No doubt a lot of these crooks
would quit the business if they couldn’t boast now and then
about what they’ve pulled off. I think crooks would become
extinct if society simply ignored them; being singled out for
public attention is very gratifying to professional wrongdoers,
and it gives them a great deal of pleasure. I’m not
saying that people rob and steal just for the glory of it; they
do it for money or from muddleheadedness or the influence
of the wrong kinds of friends, but once they get a whiff of
aura popularis, a sort of megalomania begins stirring in
them — it’s the same with politicians and other people in
the public eye.
“Let me tell you about a case from a number of years
ago, when I was the editor for our excellent regional weekly,
the Eastern Herald. True, I’m from the western part of the
country, but you’d never believe how fervently I fought for
the regional interests of eastern Czechs. It’s temperate, hilly
country, the kind you’d paint with plum trees and peaceful
streams lining the roads. But every week, in print, I roused
‘our rugged highland people, struggling mightily for their
daily bread with inhospitable nature and an unsympathetic
government’ — gentlemen, what can I say except that it was
beautifully written and straight from the heart. I only
worked there for two years, but during those two years I
stamped on the minds of the people there the conviction that
they were rugged mountaineers, that their lives were heroic
319
and demanding, that their region was deprived, however
somberly beautiful and mountainous — I think there’s
nothing better a newspaperman can do for eastern Bohemia
than transform its image into some sort of Norway. That
gives you an idea of the great tasks of which the press is
capable.
“A regional editor, you know, should concern himself
mainly with local events. One day the local police captain
stopped me on the street and said, ‘Last night some goodfor-
nothing scoundrel broke into Mr. Vasata’s grocery store.
What would you say if I told you the rascal wrote a poem
and left it lying on the counter? That takes a lot of nerve,
doesn’t it?’
“‘Show me this poem,’ I said immediately, ‘I can use it
in the Herald. You’ll see how, with the help of the press,
we’ll catch this joker. Besides, just think what a sensation it
will be for our town and for the entire region!’
“In short, after much talking, I got the poem and ran it
in the Eastern Herald. I’ll recite it for you, to the extent that
I still remember it. It went something like this:
One, two, three, four, five, six, seven,
Eight, nine, ten, and then eleven,
And now the hour of twelve is pealing,
It’s the the hour when burglars do their stealing.
While I was jimmying your lock,
Someone was coming down the block,
But if I was scared, I wouldn’t be a thief,
And the footsteps passed, to my relief,
If you listened in the dark for some kind of sound,
All you would hear is my heart pound,
The heart is an orphan and I am, too,
My mother would weep if she only knew,
For some life is nothing but bad luck and worrying,
There’s only me here, and a mouse that’s scurrying,
The mouse and I, each a thief and a sinner,
That’s why I crumbled some bread for its dinner,
But where it’s hiding it won’t tell,
Because a thief has to fear other thieves as well.
320
And it went on like that until, at the end, came:
I could keep writing on and on,
But I can’t because now my candle’s gone.
“Well, I ran the poem with an extensive, soul-searching
and esthetic analysis; I stressed its balladic elements and
pointed eloquently to subtle strains in the criminal soul. It
was, in its own way, a sensation. The papers from other
political parties and towns claimed that it was a spurious,
outright forgery; our eastern Czech competitors protested
that it was plagiarism, a clumsy translation from the English
and what have you. But when I was right in the thick of the
controversy over our local poet-thief, the police captain
came to me and said, ‘So that was supposed to put an end
to it, to this damned thief of yours. Let me tell you, sir, he’s
already robbed another store and two apartments this week,
and every single time he’s left a long poem behind him at
the scene of the crime!’
“‘I’m happy to hear it,’ I said. ‘We’ll print them!’
“‘That would be taking quite a gamble,’ grumbled the
captain. ‘That’s abetting criminals, sir! Now the fellow’s only
stealing from some sort of newly-roused literary ambition!
You’ve got to stop him somehow, and right now, understand?
Write that the poems are worthless, that they’re
lacking form or spirit or anything you want. Then I think
this scoundrel will stop stealing.’
“‘Hm,’ I said, ‘we can’t write that when we’ve already
praised him. But I’ll tell you what, we won’t print any more
of his poems, and that’s that.’
“So far so good. During the next two weeks five new
burglaries were committed, complete with poetry, but the
Eastern Herald was silent as a clam about the poems. I was
just afraid that our thief would move to Turnov or Tabor
out of offended author’s vanity and bring his stuff to the
attention of the regional press there. Imagine how those old
duffers would look down their noses at us! — The silence
321
evidently confused our thief somewhat. At any rate there
was peace for three weeks, but then the burglaries started up
again, only with this difference, that the poems in question
were mailed directly to the editor of the Eastern Herald. But
the Herald was adamant, partly because it didn’t want to
mess things up for the local authorities, and partly because
the poems got worse and worse. The author began repeating
himself and coming up with all kinds of crazy, romanticized
notions and nonsense. In short, he started behaving like a
real writer.
“One night I came home from the tavern, whistling like
a starling, and struck a match to light a kerosene lamp. At
that very moment somebody blew at the match from behind
me and snuffed it out.
“‘Don’t light another one,’ said a gloomy voice. ‘It’s
me.’
“‘Ah,’ I said, ‘and what would you be wanting?’
“‘I’m here to ask you,’ said the gloomy voice, ‘what’s
happening with the poems.’
“‘Look,’ I said — I still didn’t understand what was
going on — ‘these aren’t exactly office hours, you know.
Come see me tomorrow at eleven.’
“‘So you can turn me in?’ the voice said resentfully.
‘Forget it. Why aren’t you printing my poems anymore?’
“Not until then did it dawn on me that this was our
thief. ‘That’s a long story,’ I told him. ‘Take a seat, young
man. If you really want to know, I’m not printing your
poems because they’re not worth a damn. So there.’
“‘I didn’t think,’ the voice said painfully, ‘they were . . .
they were any worse than that first one.’
“‘That first one wasn’t bad,’ I said sternly. ‘There was
sincere feeling in it, understand? It had an intuitive freshness,
it had the immediacy and intensity of experience, it
had all of that. But those later ones, those were dogs.’
“‘But look,’ the voice pressed on, ‘look, I wrote them
just like I wrote the first one!’
322
“‘That’s the whole point,’ I said harshly. ‘You’re just
repeating yourself. You always hear footsteps outside — ‘
“‘But I really heard them,’ the voice said defensively.
‘Mr. Editor, when I’m stealing, I have to keep my ears
pricked up in case there’s somebody walking around out
there!’
“‘And there’s always that same business about a mouse,’
I continued.
“‘About a mouse,’ the voice said despondently. ‘But
there’s always a mouse there every single time! I only wrote
about a mouse in three of them — ‘
“‘To be brief,’ I interrupted him, ‘your verses have
become empty and routine literary efforts. Without originality,
without inspiration, without emotional innovation. My
well-meaning friend, it won’t do. Poets mustn’t repeat
themselves.’
“The voice fell silent for a while. ‘But Mr. Editor,’ it
said after a moment, ‘it’s always the same, see. You try
stealing, and you’ll see one job’s just like another. It’s hard
work.’
“‘It is,’ I said. ‘You ought to switch subjects.’
“‘Maybe I could rob a church,’ the voice suggested. ‘Or
a graveyard.’
“I shook my head vigorously. ‘That’s neither here nor
there,’ I said. ‘It isn’t the topic that matters so much as the
experience. In my view, what’s lacking in your poetry is any
kind of conflict. There’s never anything in your poems but a
superficial description of some ordinary burglary — You
should explore an internal theme of some sort. Conscience,
for instance.’
“The voice thought it over for a bit. ‘You think like
maybe twinges of conscience?’ it said hesitantly. ‘You think
the poems would be better then?’
“‘Of course they would,’ I exclaimed. ‘My young friend,
give them psychological depth and passion!’
“‘I’ll give it a try,’ the voice said reflectively. ‘Only I
323
don’t know if I’ll get much stealing done. You can lose your
self- confidence, you know? And if you don’t have selfconfidence,
they’ll nab you for sure.’
“‘So what?’ I cried. ‘Dear boy, it doesn’t matter if
you’re caught! Can’t you imagine the poetry you’d write in
carcere et catenis? I could show you one poem from prison
that’ll make you gasp!’
“‘Was it in the newspaper?’ the voice asked eagerly.
“‘Friend of my heart,’ I said, ‘it is one of the most
famous poems in the world. Light the lamp, and I’ll read it
to you.’
“My visitor struck a match and the lamp flared. It
showed a pale, somewhat pimply young man, as thieves and
poets tend to be. ‘Wait a minute,’ I said, ‘I’ll find it for you
right off.’ And I dug up a translation of Wilde’s “The Ballad
of Reading Gaol.” It was all the rage in those days, you
know.
“Never in my life have I recited anything with such
feeling as I did that ballad, you know, the line: Yet each
man kills the thing he loves — My guest couldn’t take his
eyes off me. And when I got to the part about how the man
goes off to the gallows, he covered his face and sobbed.
“When I finished reading, we both were silent. I didn’t
want to mar the fullness of the moment. I opened the
window and said, ‘The shortest way out is over the fence.
Good night.’ And I blew out the lamp.
“‘Good night,’ the trembling voice said in the darkness,
‘I’ll give it a try. Thanks very much.’ And then he vanished
quietly as a bat; after all, he was an accomplished thief.
“Two days later they caught him inside a store he’d
broken into. He was sitting at the counter over a piece of
paper, biting the end of a pencil. On the paper was written
only:
Each man swipes the thing he loves —
324
and nothing more. No doubt it was meant to be a variation
on “The Ballad of Reading Gaol.”
“And so our thief got eighteen months in prison for a
string of break-ins. Several months later I received a whole
notebook of poems from him. They were awful: nothing but
dank underground cells, small stone windows, iron bars,
clanking shackles on legs, musty bread, the walk to the
gallows and what not. I was thoroughly shocked by the
dreadful conditions prevailing at said prison. But, as you
may know, an editor like me can worm his way in anywhere.
So I finagled an invitation from the warden for a
tour of the place. What can I tell you but that it was an
entirely humane, presentable, and well-cared-for prison. And
I met up with my thief, just as he was finishing a meal of
canned beans.
“‘So tell me,’ I said, ‘just where are those clanking
shackles you wrote about?’
“Our thief turned red and shot a disconcerted look at
the warden. ‘Well, as to that, Mr. Editor,’ he faltered, ‘the
thing is, there’s nothing to write any poems about here! It’s
hard work, and that’s a fact.’
“‘So you’re fairly comfortable?’ I asked him.
“‘Except for that I would be,’ he mumbled in embarrassment.
‘There’s nothing to write about here.’
“From that day on I never came across him again. Not
in the crime reports column, and not in the poetry section
either.”
325
Mr. Havlena’s Verdict
“Since Mr. Zach’s brought up the subject of newspapers,”
said Mr. Beran, “let me tell you something: the first thing
most readers do when they open their newspapers is turn
straight to the crime reports. Nobody knows if they read the
reports so assiduously for their moral and legal edification
or out of latent criminality, but what’s certain is that they
read them with a passion. That’s why newspapers have to
publish some sort of crime report every day. Say there’s a
government holiday, for example, and the courts aren’t in
session; no matter, the paper still has to run its ‘From the
Courtroom’ column. And lots of times there isn’t a single
interesting case in any of the courts. Well, the reporters still
need an interesting case, wherever they can get their hands
on one. At times like that, crime reporters simply have to
dream up interesting cases on their own. Consequently,
they’ve got a regular market among themselves for bogus
cases, which they buy, borrow, or swap for twenty cigarettes
or so per case. I know all about it, because I used to room
with one of those reporters; he was a hard drinker and lazy
to boot, but apart from that he was a talented although
poorly-paid young man.
“Well, one day a very odd, bloated-looking fellow, all
grimy and down-at-heel, turned up at the tavern where the
crime reporters used to gather. His name was Havlena and
he’d studied law, but he never got his degree and his life had
gone downhill ever since. Nobody, not even he himself,
knew exactly how he made a living, but I have to tell you,
that Havlena, that loafer, was a whiz on criminal and legal
matters both. When this reporter friend of mine would give
326
him a cigar and a beer, he’d close his eyes, take a few puffs,
and begin telling him the most colorful and outlandish
criminal cases you could possibly imagine. Then he’d start in
on the main points of the defense and the prosecutor’s
rebuttal, after which he’d pronounce sentence in the name of
the Republic. And then he’d open his eyes as if coming out
of a trance and mutter, ‘Loan me a five.’ Once they put him
to the test and he cooked up twenty-one criminal cases at
one sitting, each one better than the one before. But when
he got to the twenty-second he stopped short and said, ‘Wait
a minute, this isn’t a case for a JP or even a district court.
This one would have to go before a jury, and I don’t do
juries.’ He was against juries in principle, you see. But to be
fair to him, I must say that his rulings, though severe, were
models of their kind from a legal point of view. He was
especially proud of that.
“When the reporters discovered Havlena and saw that
the cases he could supply them with weren’t as humdrum
and routine as those that actually came before the courts,
they formed a kind of cartel. For every case he thought up,
Havlena got what they called his court fee, meaning a set
rate of ten crowns and a cigar, plus two crowns extra for
every month of imprisonment he imposed. The heavier the
sentence, you understand, the more interesting and complex
the case. Never have newspaper readers been so mesmerized
by the crime reports as they were when Havlena was churning
out his fictitious cases. It’s been ages since newspapers
were as good as they were in his day. Now they’re filled
with nothing but politics and libel suits against the press — I
don’t know who on earth can read that stuff.
“One day Havlena thought up a case — not nearly one
of his best, but up to then none of them had got him into
any trouble. This time, though, it all came crashing down.
Briefly, the case went like this: an old bachelor had a fallingout
with a respectable widow who lived across the courtyard
from him, so he got a parrot and trained it so that every
327
time the neighbor lady came out on her balcony, the parrot
screeched at the top of its voice, ‘You slut!’ The widow sued
him for defamation of character. The district court said that
the defendant, by means of his parrot, had made the plaintiff
a public laughingstock, and they sentenced him in the name
of the Republic to fourteen days in jail and court costs.
Havlena wrapped up his account with, ‘That’ll be eleven
crowns and a cigar.’
“Now, this particular case of Havlena’s appeared in
about six newspapers, subject to very different literary
treatments, of course. In one paper the headline was, In a
Quiet Building. In another, Landlord and Poor Widow. A
third paper had, Parrot Charged, and so on. But no sooner
did the stories appear than each of these papers received an
official communication from the Ministry of Justice, to the
effect that said Ministry wished to know the particulars of
the defamation-of-character case tried in district court, as
reported in issue number so-and-so of your esteemed journal.
The letters stated that the verdict and sentence in the aforementioned
trial were confused and contrary to law, in that
the incriminating remarks had been uttered not by the
defendant, but by the parrot; that the evidence offered in the
trial could not be regarded as proof that the words uttered
by said parrot applied solely and specifically to the plaintiff;
and, hence, that the remarks in question could not be
considered defamation of character but at the very most as
disorderly conduct or disturbing the peace, which could have
been dealt with quickly by a reprimand from the police, by
duly imposing a fine, or by issuing a warrant to remove the
bird in question from the premises. Accordingly, the Ministry
of Justice desired to know which district court had handled
the case, in order that it might initiate appropriate inquiries
and so forth. In short, it was a regular judicial scandal.
“‘God, Havlena,’ the reporters railed at their supplier,
‘you’ve done it to us now. Look, it says here that your
ruling against the parrot is confused and contrary to law!’
328
“Havlena turned white as a pillowcase. ‘What,’ he
screamed, ‘they’re saying that my verdict is contrary to law?
The Ministry of Justice has the nerve to tell me that? Me,
Havlena? Unbelievable!’ The reporters said they’d never seen
a man so outraged and offended. ‘I’ll fix them,’ Havlena
roared, beside himself with fury. ‘They’ll see if my ruling’s
contrary to law or not! I’m not going to take this lying
down!’ In his anger and excitement, he proceeded to get
drunk on the spot, and then he took a sheet of paper and,
for the benefit of the Ministry of Justice, drew up an extensively-
detailed legal disquisition in vindication of said verdict.
He wrote that the defendant, by teaching his parrot to
insult the lady, had manifested deliberate intent to insult and
disparage her; that consequently this was a clear case of
malicious intent; that the parrot was not the perpetrator of,
but rather the instrument for, the offense in question, and so
forth. In truth, it was the most brilliant and sophisticated
legal analysis those reporters had ever seen. After which he
signed his full name, Vaclav Havlena, Candidate for Doctor
of Laws, and sent it to the Ministry of Justice. ‘That’s that,’
he said, ‘and until this matter’s taken care of, I’m not
handing out any more verdicts. I intend to receive satisfaction
first.’
“As you can imagine, the Ministry of Justice took no
notice whatsoever of Havlena’s letter. For a while, Havlena
went about disgruntled and embittered, looking even seedier
and getting even thinner than before. When he realized that
no response from the ministry would be forthcoming, he
would only scowl and spit in silence or say treasonous
things, until at last he declared, ‘You just wait, I’ll show
them who’s in the right!’
“For two months nobody saw him at all. Then one day
he turned up again, beaming and smirking, and announced,
‘Well, I’ve finally got my lawsuit! Damn the old woman, I
had a devil of a time trying to talk her into it. You wouldn’t
believe an old girl like that could be so unflappable. She
329
made me sign all these papers saying that no matter how it
turned out, I’d foot the bill. Anyhow, boys, now the whole
thing’s going to be settled in court.’
“‘What thing?’ the reporters asked.
“‘That business with the parrot,’ said Havlena. ‘What
else? I told you I wasn’t going to take it lying down. I
bought a parrot, see, and taught it to say, You slut! You
wicked old bag! Believe me, boys, it took a hell of a lot of
hard work. I didn’t set foot out of the house for six weeks,
and the only words I said the whole time were, You slut!
Anyway, now the parrot says it beautifully. The only thing
is, the stupid bird squawks it all day long. It simply can’t get
in the habit of squawking only at that old woman across the
courtyard. She’s an old girl from one of the better families,
and she gives music lessons, a very decent person, actually;
but there aren’t any other women in our apartment building,
so I had to pick on her for the defamation of character.
Listen, it’s easy enough thinking up an offense like that, but
when it comes to pulling it off, God knows that’s something
else again. I just couldn’t teach that wretched parrot to
swear at her and nobody else. It swears at absolutely everyone.
If you ask me, it does it out of sheer cussedness.’
“Havlena took a deep swig and went on. ‘So I took a
different tack. Whenever the old lady showed her face at the
window or out in the yard, I’d pop open the window so the
parrot could screech: You slut! You wicked old bag! And
would you believe it, the old girl would just laugh and call
over to me: Oh, Mr. Havlena, what a cute little bird! Damn
that woman,’ growled Havlena, ‘I had to keep after her for
two weeks before I could get her to sue me, but I’ve got
witnesses from every apartment in the building. So now it’s
going to be settled in court,’ gloated Havlena, rubbing his
hands. ‘They’ll have to convict me for defamation of character,
no two ways about it! Those red-tape tyrants from the
ministry will get no mercy from me!’
“Havlena got very restless and impatient, and he drank
330
like a Dutchman right up to the day of the trial. Once in
court, however, he was legal respectability itself. He gave a
scathing indictment of his own wrongdoing, cited in evidence
the testimony of all the other apartment-dwellers that the
offense was flagrant and disgraceful, and demanded the
severest punishment possible. The judge, a very prudent old
fellow, scratched his beard and said he’d like to hear from
the parrot. So he adjourned the hearing with instructions
that, when the court reconvened, the defendant was to bring
the bird with him as an exhibit or, if need be, as a witness.
“Havlena arrived at the next hearing with the parrot in
its cage. The parrot goggled its eyes at the startled lady clerk
and began squawking at the top of its voice: You slut! You
wicked old bag!
“‘That’s enough,’ said the judge. ‘From the evidence
provided by the parrot, it is clear that its remarks could not
have been directed solely and specifically at the plaintiff.’
“The parrot fastened its eyes on him and shrieked: You
slut!
“‘It is equally clear,’ continued His Honor, ‘that it
employs the remarks in question toward all persons, irrespective
of gender. Accordingly, Mr. Havlena, there is an
absence of malicious intent.’
“Havlena leaped up as if he’d been stung. ‘Your Honor,’
he protested in great agitation, ‘malicious intent is established
by the fact that I opened the window, thereby giving
access to the plaintiff for the sole purpose of her vilification
by the parrot!’
‘That’s a moot point,’ said His Honor. ‘The opening of
the window may possibly indicate some degree of intent, but
it is not in itself a malicious act. I cannot sentence you for
opening the window from time to time. And you, Mr.
Havlena, cannot prove that your parrot had the plaintiff in
mind.’
“‘But I had her in mind,’ Havlena cried in rebuttal.
“‘We have no evidence to that effect,’ the judge ob331
jected. ‘No one heard you utter the incriminating remarks.
It’s no use, Mr. Havlena, I shall have to acquit you.’ Whereupon
he pronounced the defendant not guilty.
“‘And I hereby announce my intent to appeal the
acquittal,’ Havlena burst out, and he grabbed the cage
containing the parrot and swept out of court, nearly weeping
with rage.
“Afterwards they would come across him here and
there, drunk and disconsolate. ‘Tell me, boys,’ he would sob,
‘do you call that justice? Is there no justice anywhere in this
world? But I’m not giving up! I’m taking it to the highest
court! They’ll vindicate me for this grievous wrong, even if I
have to spend the rest of my life in litigation. I’m not
fighting on my behalf alone, I’m fighting for justice!’
“I don’t know exactly what went on in the court of
appeals, but I do know that Havlena’s motion to overturn
his acquittal was dismissed. After that, Havlena seemed to
vanish into thin air, although there are people who say
they’ve spied him wandering around the streets like a lost
soul, muttering something or other to himself. I’ve also
heard that to this very day the Ministry of Justice still
receives, several times a year, an extensive and fiery petition
headed: Defamation of Character Committed by a Parrot.
But Havlena stopped supplying court cases to reporters once
and for all, no doubt because his faith in the justice system
and the law had been badly shaken.”
332
The Needle
“I’ve never had anything to do with the courts myself,” said
Mr. Kostelecky, “but I can tell you that what I really like
about them is how incredibly painstaking they are, and all
the speechifying and formalities they tend to go in for, even
if it’s only over some little nitpicking thing. It really gives
you a lot of confidence in the justice system. If Justice has a
set of scales in her hand, they must be truthful as a
druggist’s, and if she’s holding a sword, it must be sharp as
a razor. That reminds me of an incident that took place once
on our street.
“This concierge, a Mrs. Maskova, bought some rolls at
the corner grocery, and while she was munching away on
one of them, something suddenly jabbed her in the roof of
the mouth. So she reached around inside and pulled out a
needle. It wasn’t until a little later that she got scared and
thought, ‘My goodness, I could’ve swallowed that needle and
it could’ve punctured my stomach! It’s a matter of life and
death, and I’m not letting it drop! They’re going to have to
find out who the louse was that snuck the needle in that
roll.’ So she took the needle and what was left of the roll
and went to the police.
“The police questioned the grocer who’d sold the roll,
and they questioned the baker who’d baked it, but of course
both of them claimed they knew nothing about the needle.
So then the police turned it over to the courts, because, you
see, it was just a case of minor bodily injury. The examining
magistrate, who performed his official duties very thoroughly
and conscientiously, questioned the grocer and the baker
again; both of them solemnly swore that the needle couldn’t
333
have got inside the roll while it was at either of their establishments.
The magistrate went to check out the grocery
store and satisfied himself that there weren’t any needles
there. Then he went to check out the bakery and see how
rolls are baked. He sat all night in the bakery kitchen and
watched how the dough was mixed, how they let it rise,
how they lit the fire, and how they shaped the rolls and put
them in the oven until they were baked to a golden brown.
In that way he satisfied himself that indeed no needles are
used in the baking of rolls.
“You wouldn’t believe what fine work it is to bake
rolls, and especially to bake bread. My grandfather, bless his
soul, had a bakery, so I know what it’s like. The thing is,
you see, there are two or three great, you could almost say
holy, secrets in making bread. The first secret is how you
prepare the yeast: you let it sit in the kneading trough, and
then this mysterious transformation takes place under the
lid, and you have to wait until the flour and water become
fermented. Then the dough is worked up and mixed with a
wooden paddle; it looks like a religious dance or something
when you’re doing it. After that you cover the dough with a
piece of canvas and let it rise, and that’s the second mysterious
transformation, the way the dough rises so gloriously
and plumps itself up — but don’t you dare give in to curiosity
and lift the cloth to peek underneath. I tell you, it’s as
strange and beautiful as a pregnancy; I’ve always had the
feeling there was something very feminine about that trough.
And the third secret is the actual baking and what happens
to that soft, pale dough in the oven. Good glory, when you
take out that loaf, all crisp and golden, it smells more
delicious than a baby, it’s a miracle — I think they ought to
ring a bell in bakeries when those three transformations take
place, just like they do in church at the elevation of the
Host.
“But what I started out to say is that, at this point, the
examining magistrate was stumped — but he didn’t let the
334
matter drop, not at all. What he did was send the needle to
the Institute of Chemistry, to see if they could figure out
whether the needle got into the roll before it was baked or
afterwards; I should mention that this magistrate was very
particular about getting expert opinions. The head of the
Institute at the time was a certain Professor Uher, a very
scholarly man with lots of whiskers. Well, when Professor
Uher got the needle in the mail, he started swearing something
awful about everything these courts were always
wanting him to do, and that only the other day they’d sent
him some entrails that were in such a state of decomposition
that even the head of the dissection lab couldn’t bear it, and
what business did the Institute of Chemistry have with
needles, anyway? But then, for some reason or other, he
started having second thoughts, and the question began to
interest him, from a scientific point of view, of course. ‘I
wonder,’ he said to himself, ‘if maybe needles really do
undergo some kind of change when they come into contact
with dough or when they’re baked inside it. Maybe acids of
some kind are formed when the dough is fermenting, or
again during the baking process, and that could erode or, to
put it differently, corrode the surface of the needle somewhat.
In that case, it would show up under a microscope.’
So he set to work.
“First of all he bought several hundred needles, some
spotlessly clean and others more or less rusty, and then he
began baking rolls at the Institute of Chemistry. For the first
experiment, he put the needles directly into the yeast to find
out what effect the process of fermentation had on them.
For the second experiment, he put them into the freshly
mixed dough. For the third, into the rising dough. Then he
inserted them immediately prior to baking. Then during the
baking. After that he pushed the needles into the rolls while
they were still warm and, finally, when they were done.
Then he conducted the entire series of experiments one more
time, as a control. In fact, for two weeks they did nothing
335
else at the Institute but bake rolls with needles inside. Day
after day, the professor, the associate professor, four researchers,
and a lab assistant kneaded dough, baked rolls,
and pulled them out of the oven, whereupon they examined
the various needles under a microscope and compared the
results. This meant an additional week’s work, but in the
end they established beyond any possibility of doubt that the
needle in question had been inserted into the roll after it had
been baked, because, microscopically, it corresponded exactly
to the experimental needles that had been stuck into the rolls
when they were done.
“On the strength of this expert opinion, the magistrate
determined that the needle must have got into the roll either
at the grocer’s or on the way to the grocer’s from the
baker’s. That’s when the baker suddenly remembered, ‘By
thunder, that’s the same day I sacked that apprentice, the
boy who used to deliver my rolls in a basket!’ So they
summoned the boy, and he confessed that he’d stuck the
needle in the roll because he wanted to get even with the
baker. The boy, who was underage, only got a reprimand.
The baker was fined, because he was responsible for his
employees’ actions, but the sentence was suspended. So there
you have an example of how precise and thorough the
justice system is.
“But there’s another side to the story. I don’t know
what it is about us men that makes us so all-fired ambitious
or mulish or whatever, but once they started baking experimental
rolls at the Institute, those chemists got it into their
heads that they had to do it right. When they first started
out, the rolls were a real hodgepodge, they didn’t rise
properly and they were pretty short on looks; but the more
of them the chemists baked, the better they got. Then they
started sprinkling poppy seeds, caraway seeds, and salt on
top, and they shaped the rolls so nicely that even looking at
them was a pleasure. In the end, those chemists were boasting
that there was no place in all Prague where the rolls
336
were as crunchy, tasty, and beautiful as the ones they baked
at the Institute of Chemistry.”
“You may call it mulishness, Mr. Kostelecky,” said Mr.
Lelek, “but if you ask me, it’s more like the sporting instinct.
You know, the desire to perform at one-hundred
percent of your best. A fellow isn’t thorough and methodical
only for the sake of the results, which may not even be
worth the trouble; he does it because it’s a sort of game, an
exciting challenge he takes on of his own free will. I can
explain what I mean with a single example, even if you do
think it’s a lot of foolishness and beside the point anyway.
“When I used to be with our bookkeeping department
and did the twice-yearly closing of the accounts, it sometimes
happened that I couldn’t get the figures to tally. Once,
for instance, we were exactly three cents short. Of course, it
would have been the easiest thing in the world for me to
make up the three cents out of my own pocket, but that
wouldn’t have been playing the game; from an accountant’s
point of view, you see, that would have been unsportsmanlike.
The thing to do was to find out in which of the fourteen
thousand or so entries the error lay. And I have to
confess that I always looked forward in advance to the
possibility that some such error would crop up.
“When it did, I’d stay all night in the office, if need be,
pile the whole stack of ledgers in front of me, and get to
work. It may seem strange to you, but I always thought of
those columns of figures not as numbers, but as things.
Sometimes I’d pretend that I was climbing up those rows of
figures as if they were a steep cliff, or that I was lowering
myself down on them into a pit, as if they were a ladder.
Sometimes I felt like a hunter squeezing his way through
brambles of figures to catch a rare and timid beast — those
three cents were the beast. Or I’d fancy myself a detective,
lying in wait around the corner in the dark; thousands of
337
figures pass by me, but I’m waiting to get my hands on that
rascal, that culprit, that tiny error in the accounts. At other
times it seemed to me that I was sitting on the bank of a
river with a rod, angling for a fish; suddenly I jerk the line,
and now I’ve got you, you little devil! But more often than
not, I imagined myself to be a hunter, splashing up and
down through wet thickets of berrybushes, and I got such
pleasure and excitement from the activity, such a curious
sense of freedom and power, it was as if I were actually
living the adventure. Believe me, I could spend the whole
night chasing down those three cents. And when I’d caught
them, it would never occur to me that it was only three
piddling little coins; it was nothing short of a trophy, and I’d
go home in such high and triumphant spirits that it’s a
wonder I didn’t fall into bed with my boots on. That’s what
I wanted to tell you.”
338
The Telegram
“You call them trifles,” mused Mr. Dolezal. “It’s my observation
that, for the most part, people behave naturally and
normally only in trifling, everyday matters. But as soon as
they find themselves in unusual and highly emotional situations,
it’s as if a completely new person got into them. They
start talking in a different, I’d say dramatic voice, and they
use different kinds of words, different kinds of arguments,
even experience different kinds of feelings than they normally
do. Nine times out of ten, they burst out in bravery,
nobility, self-sacrifice and other such heroic and high-principled
traits. It’s as if they’d inhaled some sort of ozone that
impels them to make grand gestures; or maybe they gain
some kind of secret satisfaction from extraordinary or
catastrophic situations, and it’s somehow pleasing to them
and puffs them up. The thing is, they start behaving like
heroes on stage. Later, when the dramatic moment is over
and done with, they revert to their normal size. But afterwards
they feel just a touch embarrassed, as if they’d been
disillusioned or let down.
“I’ve got a cousin named Kalous, a decent and respectable
bureaucrat, citizen, and paterfamilias, a bit of a fencesitter
and a stuffed shirt, the way we older men tend to be.
Mrs. Kalousova is a fine, deserving woman, a model mother
hen, a meek homebody, a so-called doormat and so forth.
Then there’s a daughter, a really pretty girl named Vera, who
was off in France at the time, so she could learn French and
pass her exams in case she didn’t get married. Finally there’s
a son, a strapping high-school lad called Tonda, a good
soccer forward, but pretty weak in his studies. In short, a
339
good, typical, normal family from what’s called the better
middle class.
“Well, one day the Kalouses were seated at lunch when
somebody rang their doorbell. Mrs. Kalousova reappears in
the doorway, wiping her hands on her apron and saying all
in a dither, her face flushed, ‘Oh my goodness, Dad, some
kind of telegram’s arrived.’ You know how women get
alarmed when a telegram arrives; it’s due to their internal
functioning, no doubt, that they’re always expecting some
kind of fateful blow.
“‘Come, come, Mother,’ Mr. Kalous grumbled, ‘try to
get hold of yourself, no matter who sent it.’ But his hand
trembled when he opened the telegram. Everyone, even the
maid in the doorway, stared breathlessly at the head of the
family.
“‘It’s from Vera,’ Kalous finally said in a voice not quite
his own. ‘But I’m damned if I can understand a word of it.’
“‘Let me see it,’ Mrs. Kalousova burst out.
“‘Wait,’ said Kalous sternly. ‘It’s all garbled up. It says,
Gadete un ucjarc peuige bellevue grenoble vera.’
“‘How can it say that?’ gasped Mrs. Kalousova.
“‘Look at it yourself, then,’ Kalous said spitefully, ‘if
you think you can understand it any better than I can! Well,
now you’ve seen it, what’s in it?’
“Mrs. Kalousova’s eyes flooded with tears over the illomened
telegram. ‘Something’s happened to Vera,’ she
whispered. ‘Otherwise she wouldn’t have sent us a telegram!’
“‘You think I don’t know that?’ shouted Kalous, and he
put on his coat; obviously, it would be bad form in so grave
a situation to stand there without a coat. ‘Go to the kitchen,
Andula,’ he ordered the maid; after which he announced,
tragically, ‘the telegram is from Grenoble. I think Vera’s
eloped with somebody.’
“‘With who?’ exclaimed Mrs. Kalousova, shocked at the
thought.
“‘How the hell should I know?’ Mr. Kalous roared.
340
‘He’s bound to be some kind of scoundrel or artist! This is
what female independence gets you! I expected something
like this! I didn’t want to let her go there, to that damned
Paris! But you, you were always taking her side — ’
“‘You think I wanted it? Me?’ seethed Mrs. Kalousova.
‘You’re the one who was always preaching to her about how
she was supposed to study something, how she was supposed
to earn a living for herself!’ At which point she broke
into sobs and crumpled into a chair, ‘Dear Jesus, poor Vera!
Maybe something did happen to her — Maybe she’s lying
there sick — ’
“Mr. Kalous, all worked up, began to pace about the
room. ‘Sick?’ he cried. ‘Why would she be sick? Let’s just
hope it wasn’t some kind of suicide attempt! Probably that
fellow kidnapped her — and then he ran out on her — ‘
“Mrs. Kalousova began to tear off her apron. ‘I’m
going after her,’ she declared with a moan. ‘I’m not leaving
her there — I — ’
“‘You’re not going anywhere,’ bellowed Kalous.
“Mrs. Kalousova rose; never before had they seen her
display such dignity. ‘I am a mother, Kalous,’ she said. ‘I
know my duty.’ Whereupon she withdrew with a certain
grandeur.
“The two men, that is, father Kalous and the boy
Tonda, remained alone. ‘We must be prepared for the worst,’
said Kalous darkly. ‘Maybe Vera was kidnapped — Don’t
say anything in front of your mother. I’ll go to Grenoble
myself.’
“‘Father,’ said Tonda in his deepest voice — at all other
times he said Dad, ‘let me do it. I’ll go there. I know a little
French, you know — ’
“‘They’d be scared to death of a boy like you,’ jeered
father Kalous. ‘I’m rescuing my child! I’m taking the next
train out — Let’s just hope it’s not too late!’
“‘Train!’ scoffed Tonda. ‘You might as well go there by
foot! If I were going, I’d take a plane to Strasbourg — ‘
341
“‘You think I’m afraid to fly?’ yelled father Kalous. ‘For
your information, I’m flying! As for that scoundrel,’ he
threatened belligerently, shaking his fists, ‘I’ll p-p-pulverize
him! Poor child!’
“Tonda laid his hand on his father’s shoulder; it was
wonderful how all at once that lout had turned into a man.
‘Father,’ he said soothingly, ‘this isn’t for you; you’re too old
for it. You can rely on me. You know I’ll do everything
humanly possible for my sister.’ Until that moment, of
course, like younger brothers in general, he had regarded his
sister with nothing but heartfelt masculine contempt.
“Kalous shook his head. ‘No,’ he said solemnly, ‘this is
my affair. A child can’t rely on anyone like she can on her
father. I’m going there, Tonda. Meanwhile, you must be
Mother’s support. These women, you know — ’
“Just then Mrs. Kalousova entered, dressed to go out.
Oddly enough, she did not look in the least like someone in
need of support.
“‘And where, if you please, are you off to?’ sputtered
Kalous.
“‘To the bank,’ said the courageous woman, utterly
aloof. ‘To get my money. So I can go to my daughter in that
foreign country.’
“‘That’s nonsense!’ exploded Kalous.
“‘It’s not,’ said Mrs. Kalousova, cool as ice. ‘I know
what I’m doing. And I know why I’m doing it.’
“‘Woman,’ said Kalous decisively, ‘just so you know,
I’m going after Vera myself.’
“‘You?’ said Mrs. Kalous with something approaching
disdain. ‘What use would you be in France? Not that you’d
ever drag yourself away from your comforts here,’ she added
crushingly.
“Father Kalous tensed and turned red. ‘Don’t you
worry,’ he said sharply, ‘about what use I’d be in France.
I’ve already figured out exactly what needs to be done. I am
prepared for everything. Just tell the maid to pack my
342
overnight bag, all right?’
“‘I know you,’ declared Mrs. Kalousova. ‘If your boss
doesn’t give you the time off, you won’t be going anywhere.’
“‘The hell with my boss!’ Kalous yelled. ‘The hell with
the office! Let them fire me! I’ll make a living somehow! I’ve
sacrificed my whole life for my family up to now and I’ll
sacrifice the rest of it, too, understand?’
“Mrs. Kalousova dropped down on the edge of a chair.
‘Man,’ she said through clenched teeth, ‘get through your
head what’s going on here! I’m the one who’s going to go
take care of her! I have a feeling that Vera is hovering
between life and death! I have to be with her — ’
“‘And I have a feeling,’ declared Kalous, ‘that she’s in
the clutches of some scoundrel. If we only knew what that
telegram meant, we could prepare — ’
“‘ — for the worst!’ wailed Mrs. Kalousova.
“‘Maybe,’ Kalous said gloomily. ‘I’m just afraid to think
what that telegram actually says.’
“‘Listen,’ Mrs. Kalousova offered uncertainly, ‘maybe
we could ask Mr. Horvat about it.’
“‘About what?’ said Kalous, taken aback.
“‘About what’s in that telegram. After all, Mr. Horvat
works out codes and things — ’
“‘He does for a fact,’ Mr. Kalous breathed in relief. ‘He
could figure this out! Andula,’ he bawled, ‘run up to the
fifth floor and ask Mr. Horvat to please come down here!’
“I should tell you that Mr. Horvat is with our intelligence
service, and his work is mainly involved with deciphering
secret codes. They say he’s a genius, this Horvat; give
him enough time and he can break any code. But it’s horrendously
painstaking work, and anyone who does it gets a
little unhinged.
“Anyway, it wasn’t long before Mr. Horvat arrived at
the door; he’s such a fussy little shrimp and he gives off this
awful smell of peppermint.
“‘Mr. Horvat,’ Kalous began, ‘I received this completely
343
unintelligible telegram, and we thought that maybe you
could kindly —’
“‘Let me have a look,’ said Mr. Horvat. He read it
through and remained seated with his eyes half closed. There
was a deathly silence.
“‘Yes indeed,’ said Mr. Horvat, breaking the silence by
and by, ‘and who is the telegram from?’
“‘From our daughter, Vera,’ explained Kalous. ‘She’s
studying in France.’
“‘Aha,’ said Mr. Horvat, and he rose. ‘You’re supposed
to wire two hundred francs to her at the Hotel Bellevue in
Grenoble, that’s all.’
“‘You figured out what was in the telegram?’ Kalous
burst out.
“‘Of course I did,’ grumbled Mr. Horvat. ‘This is no
code, it’s only garbled words. But I ask you, why else would
a young girl like that send a telegram? Probably she lost her
purse with her money in it, that’s all. That’s what’s happened.’
“‘And there couldn’t be . . . there couldn’t possibly be
something worse in the telegram?’ Kalous asked uncertainly.
“‘Why would there be anything worse in it?’ Mr.
Horvat wondered. ‘Look, more often than not it’s always
something ordinary that happens. Women’s purses aren’t
worth a darn.’
“‘We are grateful to you, sir,’ said Kalous frigidly.
“‘Don’t mention it,’ grumbled Mr. Horvat, and he left.
“There was silence for a brief moment at the Kalouses’.
‘Listen,’ broke in Kalous, embarrassed, ‘I don’t care for that
man at all. He’s a . . . well, he’s a boor.’
“Mrs. Kalousova began to unbutton her coat. ‘A bore,’
she said. ‘Are you going to send Vera the money?’
“‘Of course I’m sending it,’ Kalous muttered peevishly.
‘Silly goose, she had to go and lose her purse! Does she
think money grows on trees? She deserves a couple of good
— ‘
344
“‘I scrimp like crazy,’ Mrs. Kalousova added bitterly,
‘and she, Miss Spendthrift, can’t even keep an eye on her
purse! That’s what’s wrong with these children — ‘
“‘And quit gawking and go do your homework, you
lazy brat,’ Kalous snapped at Tonda, and then he straggled
off to the post office. Never in his life had Kalous been so
irritated as at that moment. And from that time on he
considered Horvat a rather rude, cynical, almost indecent
man, as if Horvat had offended him somehow.”
345
The Man Who Couldn’t Sleep
“When Mr. Dolezal here was talking about deciphering,”
Mr. Kavka said, “it reminded me of something I once pulled
on my colleague Musil. Musil is an unusually well-educated
and sophisticated man, but he’s the type of intellectual who
sees a problem in everything and has to cast around for his
point of view on it. For example, he even has a point of
view on his own wife: Musil isn’t a partner in the state of
matrimony, he’s a partner in the problem of matrimony. He
thinks in terms of the social problem, the sexual question,
the problem of the subconscious, the problem of education,
the crisis of contemporary culture, and a whole range of
other problems. These people who see problems in everything
are just as insufferable as people who have principles. I
don’t like problems. To me, an egg is an egg, and if somebody
starts telling me about the problem of the egg, well, I
start worrying that the egg is rotten. I’m telling you this so
you’ll know what Musil is like.
“Once, just before Christmas, he took it into his head
to go skiing up in the Krkonose Mountains. And because he
still had a few things to pick up, he announced that he’d
stop by the office later to say goodbye. Right after he left,
Dr. Mandel came in looking for him — you know, the
famous columnist and a very strange character — and said
he had to speak with Musil at once. ‘Musil isn’t here,’ I told
him, ‘but he’ll probably drop by before he leaves. Why don’t
you wait for him?’ Mandel frowned. ‘I can’t wait,’ he said,
‘but I’ll write him a note telling him why I wanted to see
him.’ Then he sat down at a desk and began to write.
“I don’t know if any of you can imagine handwriting
346
more illegible than Dr. Mandel’s. It looks like a seismograph
reading — a sort of long, jerky, horizontal line that twitches
from time to time or leaps up and down, zigzag fashion . . .
I knew his handwriting well, so I just watched the way his
hand rode around on the paper. Suddenly Mandel scowled,
crumpled up the paper impatiently, flung it into the wastebasket,
and jumped up. ‘Takes too long,’ he muttered, and
then he was gone, just like that.
“The day before Christmas, you know, a man doesn’t
want to do any serious work. So I sat at my desk and began
making seismograph lines on a piece of paper: a long, shaky
stroke, bouncing up and down every so often, whatever
happened to strike me. I amused myself with it for a while,
and then I put the paper, covered with my scrawls, on
Musil’s desk. Just then Musil showed up at the door, all
decked out for the mountains, with skis and ski poles over
his shoulder. ‘I’m off,’ he blared cheerfully from the doorway.
“‘Someone was here looking for you,’ I said cautiously.
‘He left you a note; apparently it’s important.’
“‘Show it to me,’ said Musil with zest. ‘What’s this?’ he
said, somewhat taken aback by that product of mine. ‘It’s
from Dr. Mandel,’ he remarked. ‘I wonder what he wants
with me.’
“‘I don’t know,’ I mumbled brusquely, ‘he was in a
hurry. But I’d hate to have to figure out his handwriting.’
“‘I can read his scribbling,’ Musil declared recklessly,
and he propped up his skis and poles and sat down at the
desk. ‘Hm,’ he said after a moment, and then he began
concentrating in earnest. There was half an hour of dead
silence. Then Musil fetched a sigh of relief and stood up.
‘There, I think I’ve got the first two words. They’re: Dear
Sir. But now I have to dash to the station. I’ll take the note
with me, and if I can’t solve it on the train ride, then the
devil himself must have written it!’
“After New Year’s he returned from his expedition to
347
the mountains. ‘So how was your vacation, friend Musil?’ I
asked. ‘It’s beautiful in the mountains now, isn’t it?’
“Musil merely waved his hand. ‘I have no idea,’ he
said. ‘I must confess I spent the entire time in my hotel
room. I didn’t even poke my nose out the door, but everyone
there said it was magnificent.’
“‘What happened?’ I asked sympathetically, ‘Were you
sick?’
“‘Not at all,’ Musil answered with feigned modesty. ‘I
spent the whole time deciphering Mandel’s note. And I want
you to know that I BROKE THE CODE,’ he declared in
triumph. ‘There were only two or three words I couldn’t
make out. I sat up all night over them — but I’d made up
my mind that I was going to break it, and I did.’
“I hadn’t the courage to tell him that the note was only
my chicken-scratches. ‘And was the message that important?’
I asked with concern. ‘Was it at least worth your efforts?’
“‘That doesn’t matter,’ Musil replied imperiously. ‘To
me, it was more interesting as a graphological problem. In
the note, Dr. Mandel asked me if, within the next couple of
weeks, I would write an article for his journal — about
what, I can’t exactly make out. And then he wishes me
happy holidays and a pleasant stay in the mountains. Altogether
it isn’t much; but the deciphering, Dolezal, that was
truly a hard nut to crack — there’s nothing like it for
improving the mind. It was well worth the couple of days
and nights I spent on it.’”
“You shouldn’t have done that to him,” Mr. Paulus said
reproachfully. “The hell with the ‘couple of days,’ but those
nights without sleep — there’s the harm. Sleep, my friend,
isn’t only for resting the body; sleep is more like a purification
and forgiveness for the day just ended. Sleep is a divine
gift, and for the first few minutes after a good sleep, the
soul is pure and innocent as a child.
348
“I know this, because at one time I suffered from loss
of sleep. Perhaps it was the consequence of a misspent life,
or perhaps there was something physically wrong with me, I
don’t know. But hardly had I gotten into bed and sensed
that first prickle of drowsiness in my eyes than a sort of
tingling would begin, and then I would lie for hours and
hours staring into the darkness until it began to grow light.
And this went on for an entire year, a year without sleep.
“When a man can’t fall asleep, he first of all tries not to
think about anything. That’s why he counts things, or prays.
Suddenly the thought comes to him: Oh no, I forgot to do
such-and-such yesterday! And then it strikes him that they
probably overcharged him at the store. Next he remembers
that, just the other day, his wife or his friend answered him
in such an odd way. Later on, a piece of furniture creaks,
and he thinks it’s a burglar and begins to feel the heat of
fear and shame. And then, once he’s thoroughly alarmed, he
starts to examine the condition of his body and, sweating in
terror, tries to remember everything he’s ever heard about
Bright’s disease or cancer. Then, from out of nowhere, some
embarrassing nonsense from twenty years ago pops into his
mind, and even now it makes his sweat run cold. Step by
step he’s confronted with his alien, persistent, unredeemed
self; with his weaknesses, his crude and loathsome ways, the
misbehavior, idiocies, and ridicule, how he made a fool of
himself, slights and suffering from the long-ago past. Everything
awkward and painful and humiliating comes back to
him, just as when he first lived through it. Nothing is spared
the man who cannot sleep. His whole world is distorted and
his perspective is increasingly tormented. Things you forgot
long ago smirk at you as if they were saying, ‘You clown,
you conducted yourself nicely that time, didn’t you? And
remember, when you were fourteen, how your first love
didn’t show up for that date? You know she was kissing
somebody else, don’t you, your friend Vojta, and they were
laughing at you! You fool, fool, fool!’ — You writhe in your
349
burning bed and try to persuade yourself that, damn it, it’s
nothing to me now! What happened happened, and that’s
that! — You should know how untrue that is. Everything
that was, is. Even what you’re unaware of exists. And I am
convinced that memory exists even after death.
“Look, you know me pretty well. You know I’m not a
sorehead or a hypochondriac or some other kind of crank.
I’m not a whiner, not quarrelsome or touchy, not a crybaby,
bore, or pessimist. I love life and people and also myself, I
barge right into the middle of things like a fool, I love to
grapple with life. In short, I’m just a rough-edged, ordinary
kind of fellow, the way any man should be. Even during that
time when I couldn’t sleep, I spent my days rushing about, I
took on whatever came my way and went from one task to
the next. I comforted myself with the myth of the blessedly
active man. But the moment I crept into bed and began my
sleepless night, my life fell apart. On the one hand, there
was the life of a busy, successful, self-satisfied, and healthy
man, who prospers in everything, thanks to energy, knowhow,
and shameless good luck. But in bed lay a man exhausted,
a man who realized with horror the failures, the
shame, the sordidness and humiliations of his entire life. I
was living two lives which had almost no connection with
each other and which were frighteningly dissimilar: one, by
day, consisting of activity, accomplishment, personal contact
and trust, the enjoyment of challenges and the ordinary sort
of getting by — a life with which I was, in my own way,
happy and content. But during the night a second life unfolded,
woven from pain and confusion: the life of a man
who has met only with failure; a man who was betrayed by
everyone and who was false and mean- spirited to everyone
in return; a tragic, clumsy fool whom everyone hated and
deceived; a weakling, a loser who reeled from one dishonorable
defeat to the next. Each of these lives was consistent,
coherent, and entire in itself. When I was in the midst of
living one of them, it seemed to me that the other belonged
350
to somebody else, that it had nothing to do with me or that
it was only make-believe; that it was self-deception, a pathological
illusion. In the daytime I loved; at night I suspected
and hated. In the daytime I lived in our world; at night I
lived in mine. Whoever thinks only of himself loses the
world.
“And so it seems to me that sleep is like dark, deep
water; and in it, everything we do not and should not know
drifts away. These odd impurities that deposit themselves in
us rise to the surface and flow into the unconscious, where
there are no shores. Our wickedness and cowardice, all our
painful, everyday transgressions, our humbling follies and
failures, the fleeting look of dislike and deceit in the eyes of
those we love, everything of which we ourselves are guilty,
even that of which others are guilty towards us, everything
wanders silently away somewhere beyond the reach of
awareness. Sleep is boundlessly merciful. It forgives both us
and those who trespass against us.
“And I’ll tell you something else. That which we call
our life is not at all everything that we have experienced, it
is only a selection. That which we are experiencing now is
too much, more than we are capable of understanding.
That’s why we choose only this or that, whatever suits us or
is convenient, and from it we somehow knit the simple plot,
the fabrication we call our ‘life.’ But at the same time, what
rubbish we leave behind, what strange and terrible things we
unconsciously omit. My God, if we only realized what it is
we do! But we are capable only of living one simple life.
More than that would be more than we could bear. We
wouldn’t have the strength to endure life if we could not
discard the larger part of it along the way.”
351
The Stamp Collection
“It’s the holy truth,” said old Mr. Karas. “If a man rummaged
around in his past, he’d find enough material in it for
several different lives. At some point . . . whether by mistake
or inclination . . . he chooses only one of them and lives it
through to the end. But the worst of it is that those other,
those possible lives, aren’t entirely dead. And sometimes you
can feel pain from them, just as one does from an amputated
leg.
“When I was a boy of about ten, I began collecting
stamps. My dad wasn’t at all happy about it, because he
thought it would interfere with my schoolwork. But I had a
pal, Lojzik Cepelka, and together we indulged in our passion
for stamps. Lojzik was an organ-grinder’s son, a grubby,
freckled lad, scruffy as a sparrow, and I loved him as only
kids can love their buddies. Listen, I’m an old man; I’ve had
a wife and children, but I’m telling you there’s no human
emotion as beautiful as friendship. You’re only capable of it
when you’re young, however; later on you get crusty somehow,
and selfish. The kind of friendship I’m talking about
springs up from pure enthusiasm and admiration, from an
overflow of vitality, from exuberance and an abundance of
emotion — you have so much of it that you just have to
give it away to someone. My dad was a lawyer, head man
among the local notables, a terribly dignified and demanding
gentleman — and I’d taken up with Lojzik, the friend of my
heart, whose father was a drunken organ-grinder and mother
a work-worn laundress. And yet I worshiped and idolized
Lojzik, because he was more handy and resourceful than I,
because he was self- sufficient and brave as a rat, and
352
because he had freckles on his nose and could throw stones
left-handed — I can’t even remember now what all I loved
him for, but it was undoubtedly the greatest love of my life.
“And so Lojzik was my beloved, trusty pal when I
began collecting stamps. Somebody once said that only men
have a flair for collecting. It’s true: I think it’s an instinct or
a holdover from the times when every male collected his
enemies’ heads, stolen weapons, bearskins, stags’ antlers and,
on the whole, anything he could capture. But a stamp
collection, it isn’t merely a possession, it’s a nonstop adventure.
It’s as if somehow, trembling with excitement, you’re
touching a bit of some faraway land, Bhutan, say, or Bolivia,
or the Cape of Good Hope. To put it simply, it’s like having
a personal and intimate connection with all those foreign
countries. There’s something about stamp-collecting that
makes you think of travel and voyages and the whole wide
world of manly adventures in general. It’s a lot like the
Crusades.
“As I was saying, my father didn’t like the idea at all.
Fathers as a rule don’t like it when their sons do something
different from what they do themselves; look, I was the the
same way with my own sons. By and large, this business of
being a father is a matter of mixed emotions: there’s a great
deal of love involved, but there’s also a certain preoccupation,
mistrust, hostility or whatever you want to call it. The
more you love your children, the more this other emotion
enters in. Anyway, I had to hide my stamp collection in the
attic so my dad wouldn’t catch me with it. There was an old
chest in the attic, one of those old-fashioned flour bins, and
we used to crawl into it like a couple of mice and look over
each other’s stamps: Look, this one’s a Netherlands, this
one’s an Egypt, here’s one from Sverige — that’s Sweden.
And because we had to hide out like that with our treasures,
there was something almost deliciously sinful about it. The
way I got hold of those stamps was adventurous, too. I’d go
around to different households, whether we knew the fami353
lies there or not, and beg them to let me soak the stamps off
their old letters. Every so often people would have drawers
crammed with old papers in their attics or desks; those were
my most blissful hours, sitting on the floor and sorting
through those dusty piles of junk paper, looking for stamps I
didn’t already have — in other words, fool that I was, I
didn’t collect duplicates. When I’d find an old Lombardy or
one of those tiny German states or free cities, the joy I felt
was perfectly agonizing — every vast happiness carries its
own sweet pain, you know. Meanwhile, Lojzik would be
waiting for me outside, and when I’d finally come out, I’d
whisper right from the doorway: Lojzik, Lojzik, there was a
Hanover in there! — Got it? — Yes! — And off we’d run
with our plunder, home to our treasure chest.
“We had some textile factories in our town that made
all kinds of shoddy stuff: jute, calico, cheap prints, and other
third-rate cotton goods; in other words, the kind of worthless
trash we churn out specially for colored people all over
the globe. Anyway, they used to let me ransack their wastepaper
baskets, and that was my richest hunting ground.
That’s where I found stamps from Siam and South Africa,
China, Liberia, Afghanistan, Borneo, Brazil, New Zealand,
India, the Congo — I don’t know about you, but to me even
the very names ring with mystery and fill me with a kind of
longing. Great heaven, the joy, the savage joy I felt when I’d
come across a stamp from, say, the Straits Settlements — or
Korea! Nepal! New Guinea! Sierra Leone! Madagascar!
Listen, it’s a rapture that only a hunter or a treasure-seeker
can understand, or an archaeologist on a dig. To seek and to
find, that’s the greatest thrill, the greatest satisfaction life can
offer. Everyone should search for something; if not stamps,
then truth, or golden ferns, or at least stone arrowheads and
ashtrays.
“Well, those were the happiest years of my life, my
friendship with Lojzik and the stamp collection. Then I had
scarlet fever and they wouldn’t let Lojzik come and see me,
354
but he’d stand in our hallway and whistle so I could hear
him. One day they weren’t paying that much attention to me
or something; anyway, I slipped out of bed and headed
lickety-split for the attic to have a look at my stamps. I was
so weak I could hardly raise the lid of the chest. But the
chest was empty. The box with the stamps was gone.
“There’s no way I can possibly describe my heartache
and horror. I think I must have stood there as if I’d been
turned to stone, and I couldn’t even cry, there was such a
lump in my throat. To begin with, it was horrifying that my
stamps, my greatest joy, were gone. But what was even more
horrifying was that Lojzik, my only friend, must have stolen
them while I was sick in bed. Dismay, disillusionment, grief,
despair — believe me, it’s astonishing what someone who’s
only a child can suffer. How I got out of that attic, I have
no idea. But afterwards I lay in bed once again with a high
fever, and in my clearer moments I remembered and grieved.
I never said anything about it to my father or my aunt — I
didn’t have a mother. I knew they simply wouldn’t understand
me, and because of that I became more or less alienated
from them. From that time on I no longer felt any close
attachment to them, the way children normally do. As for
Lojzik’s betrayal, it was very nearly a mortal wound; it was
my first and greatest disillusionment in my fellow human
beings. Beggar, I said to myself, Lojzik’s a beggar, and that’s
why he steals; it serves me right for being best friends with a
beggar. And it hardened my heart. From then on I began to
make distinctions among people — I lost my state of societal
innocence. But I didn’t realize, then, how deep a shock it
had been to me and how much damage it had done.
“When I got over my fever, I also got over my pain at
the loss of my stamp collection. Except that my heart still
ached when I saw that, in the meantime, Lojzik had found
new pals. But when he came running up to me, a little
embarassed because it had been such a long time, I said to
him in a blunt, grown-up way, ‘Shove off, I’m not talking to
355
you.’ Lojzik turned red, and after a moment he said, ‘Suits
me, too.’ And from that time on he hated me with stubborn,
working-class scorn.
“Well, that was the incident that determined the course
of my life, my choice of life, as Mr. Paulus would say. What
I would say is that my world had been desecrated. I lost my
faith in people. I learned to hate and despise. I never had a
close friend again. And when I grew up, I even began to
take pride in the fact that I was alone, that I didn’t need
anyone and didn’t yield an inch to anybody. Later I discovered
that nobody liked me. I told myself it was because I
had nothing but contempt for love and didn’t give a damn
for sentiment. And so I became a proud and ambitious man,
self-centered, exacting, altogether correct in every particular.
I was harsh and heavy-handed with my subordinates; I made
a loveless marriage and brought up my children to fear and
obey me; and, thanks to my diligence and industry, I gained
a well-deserved reputation. That was my life, my whole life.
I attended only to that which I considered my duty. When I
go to meet my Maker, no doubt the newspapers will say that
I was a leader in my field and a man of exemplary character
and principle. But if people knew of the loneliness in all
that, the mistrust and the callousness —
“Three years ago my wife died. I never admitted it to
myself or to anyone else, but I was deeply saddened. And in
my grief I rummaged through all kinds of family keepsakes
that had been left by my father and mother: photographs,
letters, my old notebooks from school — my throat constricted
when I saw how carefully my stern father had saved
them and stored them away; I think he must have loved me
after all. The cabinet in the attic was filled with things like
that, and at the bottom of one of the drawers was a box
which had been sealed with my father’s seals. When I
opened it, I discovered the stamp collection that I had put
together fifty years before.
“I’m not going to keep anything back from you; I burst
356
into a flood of tears, and I carried that box into my room as
if it were a treasure. So that’s what happened, I suddenly
realized: while I was confined in bed, somebody had found
my stamp collection and my father had confiscated it so that
I wouldn’t neglect my studies! He shouldn’t have done it,
but it was because of his strict love and concern for me. I’m
not sure why, but I began to feel pity for him, and for
myself, too —
“And then it came to me: This meant that Lojzik hadn’t
stolen my stamps! Great heaven, how I had wronged him!
— Again I saw the freckled, scruffy urchin before me —
God knows what had become of him or even whether he
was still alive! I can’t tell you the pain and shame I felt
when I thought back on it all. Because of one false suspicion
I lost my only friend; because of that I lost my childhood.
Because of that I began to despise the poor and their verminous
brats; because of that I became puffed up with selfimportance.
Because of that I never again formed a close
attachment to anyone. Because of that I could never in my
entire life look at a postage stamp without resentment and
disgust. Because of that I never wrote to my wife, either
before or during our marriage, and I disguised it by pretending
that such outbursts of sentimentality were beneath me;
and it hurt my wife deeply. Because of that I was harsh and
aloof. Because of that, only because of that, did I rise so
high in my profession and fulfill my obligations in such an
exemplary manner —
“I saw my whole life afresh. All at once it seemed
empty and meaningless to me. Why, I might have lived my
life in an entirely different way, I suddenly realized. If that
hadn’t happened — there was so much enthusiasm and love
of adventure in me, so much affection, imagination, and
confidence, so much that was singular and passionate — my
God, I might have been someone else altogether, an explorer
or an actor or a soldier! Why, I might have loved people,
drunk with them, understood them, who knows what I
357
might have done! It was just as if ice were thawing inside
me. I turned over stamp after stamp; they were all there,
Lombardy, Cuba, Siam, Hanover, Nicaragua, the Philippines,
all the lands I had wanted to travel to and now would never
see. Every stamp embraced a small piece of something that
might have been and never was. I sat there through the
entire night, going over the stamps and taking stock of my
life. I saw that it had been someone else’s life, artificial and
impersonal, and that, in reality, my true life had never come
into being.” Mr. Karas gestured with his hand. “When I
think of all that I might have been — and how I wronged
Lojzik — ”
Upon hearing these words, Father Voves frowned and
looked extremely unhappy; most likely he had remembered
something in his own life. “Mr. Karas,” he said, much
moved, “don’t think about it now. What would be the use,
you can’t rectify it now, you can’t make a fresh start — ”
“No,” sighed Mr. Karas, and then he flushed slightly.
“But you know, at least — at least I’ve started collecting
stamps again!”
358
An Ordinary Murder
“I’ve often wondered,” said Mr. Hanak, “why injustice
seems worse to us than almost anything else that could
happen to a person. For instance, if we saw a single innocent
man sent to prison, we’d be more upset and bothered
by that than by thousands of people living in poverty and
pain. I’ve seen misery so horrifying that any prison is sheer
luxury by comparison; and yet the worst possible misery
doesn’t offend us as much as injustice. I think we must have
some kind of inherent instinct for justice, and that our
feelings about guilt and innocence, fairness and right are just
as primitive, awesome, and deeply instinctive as love and
hunger.
“Take this example: I was at the front for four years,
just as many of you were. We won’t tell each other what we
saw there, but you’ll agree with me that the likes of us got
accustomed to pretty much anything — to dead bodies, for
instance. I’ve seen the corpses of hundreds and hundreds of
young men, sometimes unbelievably grisly corpses, as you
well know; and I don’t mind telling you that, after a time,
they meant no more to me than if they were so many
bundles of old rags, as long as they didn’t stink. All I said to
myself was, if you get out of this bestial mess alive and
whole, nothing’s going to shake you for the rest of your life.
“About six months after the war, after I was back home
in Slatina, somebody banged on my window one morning
and called, ‘Mr. Hanak, better come have a look. Mrs.
Turkova’s been killed!’ This Mrs. Turkova had a tiny shop
that sold stationery and thread. Nobody ever paid much
attention to her, except that now and then someone would
359
come into her shop for a spool of thread or some Christmas
cards. At the back of the shop there was a glass-paneled
door leading into a small kitchen, which is where she slept;
curtains hung over the door, and when the bell at the shop
door jingled Mrs. Turkova would peep through the curtains
to see who it was, wipe her hands on her apron, and step
into the shop. ‘Yes? What do you want?’ she’d ask suspiciously.
The customer would feel like an intruder there and
try to get out again as quickly as possible. It was the same
as when you lift up a stone and there underneath, in a damp
little hole, is this solitary, startled beetle scurrying about; so
you put the stone back, to let the disagreeable creature calm
down again.
“Well, when I heard the news, I ran to have a look, I
suppose just out of common curiosity. People were swarming
like bees in front of Mrs. Turkova’s shop, but the local
policeman let me go inside because he regarded me as an
educated man. The bell jingled and broke the silence just the
way it always had, but now its bright, lively peal made me
shiver; it struck me as being out of place there. Mrs.
Turkova lay in the doorway between the shop and the
kitchen with her face to the floor, and under her head was a
pool of blood which by now had turned nearly black; the
gray hair at the nape of her neck was matted and stained
with more dark blood. And at that moment I suddenly
became aware of a feeling I had never experienced during
the war: horror over the body of a dead human being.
“It’s strange, but I’ve almost forgotten about the war; in
fact, everybody’s gradually forgetting about it, and maybe
that’s why, sooner or later, there’ll have to be another. But I
will never forget that murdered old woman who, essentially,
was of little use or interest to anyone at all, that old woman
with her tiny shop who couldn’t even sell a postcard properly.
A murdered person isn’t the same as a dead person,
because there’s a kind of terrible secret about it. I simply
couldn’t understand why Mrs. Turkova of all people had
360
been murdered, that ordinary, unremarkable, faded old lady
to whom no one had ever given a second thought, or how
she came to be lying there so pathetically with a policeman
bending over her, while outside, all those people were
pushing to take a look. Believe me, the poor thing had never
attracted as much attention as she did then, lying there with
her face in that dark pool of blood. It was as if she’d suddenly
acquired a strange and horrifying importance. Never
in my life had I taken any notice of how she was dressed or
what she really looked like, but now it seemed as if I were
looking at her through a glass in which everything was
vastly and grotesquely magnified. There was a carpet slipper
on one foot; the other slipper had been removed and you
could see where the stocking had been mended at the heel —
I could see every stitch, and there was something dreadful
about it, I thought, as if even that poor, frayed stocking had
been murdered, too. One hand was clutching at the floor; it
looked as wizened and fragile as a bird’s claw. But most
horrifying of all was that twist of gray hair at the nape of
the murdered woman’s neck, because it was so painstakingly
braided and it shone like old pewter among the congealed
rivulets of blood. I felt as if I’d never seen anything more
heartrending than that stained and spattered little coil. One
ribbon of blood had dried behind her ear; a small silver
earring with a tiny blue stone glistened above it. I couldn’t
stand the sight any longer, my legs were shaking. ‘Jesus
Christ,’ I said.
“The policeman, who was in the kitchen looking for
something on the floor, got to his feet and looked at me. He
was pale, as if he were on the verge of fainting.
“‘Oh,’ I blurted, ‘were you at the front, too?’
“‘I was,’ the policeman said in a husky voice. ‘But this
— this is different. Look at that,’ he added suddenly, and he
pointed to the curtains on the door. They were crumpled and
smeared with blood; evidently the murderer had wiped his
hands on them. ‘Good God,’ I gasped. I don’t know what
361
was so unbearably harrowing about it — whether it was the
image of hands sticky with blood, or the idea that the
curtains, those clean and tidy curtains, had also become a
victim of the crime — I simply don’t know. But at that
moment a canary in that little kitchen began warbling and
then burst into a lengthy trill. Well, that was really more
than I could stand. I bolted out of the shop in sheer horror
— I think I must have been even paler than the policeman.
“I sat down on the shaft of a wagon in our yard and
tried to collect my thoughts. ‘You fool,’ I said to myself,
‘you coward, it’s just an ordinary murder! Haven’t you ever
seen blood before? Haven’t you been splashed with your
own blood, like a pig with mud? Haven’t you shouted to
your men to hurry up and dig a pit for a hundred-and-thirty
dead bodies? A hundred-and-thirty corpses side by side,
that’s one long line, even if you lay them out as close together
as shingles on a roof. You’d walked alongside them,
smoked cigarettes, and yelled at the troops, ‘All right, get
moving, get moving, we haven’t got all night.’ You’ve seen
so many dead people, so many dead —
“‘Yes,’ I said to myself, ‘that’s it. I’ve seen so many
dead, but I never saw one single, lone Dead Human Being.
I’ve never knelt down beside it to look into its face and
touch its hair. A dead human being is horribly silent; you
need to be alone with it . . . and not even breathe . . . if you
want to understand it. Every one of those hundred-and-thirty
would have tried his best to say to you: Lieutenant, sir,
they’ve killed me; but look at my hands, they’re the hands of
a man! — But we all turned our backs on the dead. We had
a war to fight, we couldn’t stop and listen to the ones who’d
fallen. By God, maybe what’s needed is for people — boys,
women, and children — to swarm like bees around every
man who fell, so that they could see at least some small part
of him, at least a foot in its army boot or a lock of bloodstained
hair. Then maybe these things wouldn’t happen; then
they couldn’t happen.
362
“And I had buried my mother. She looked so solemn, so
peaceful and dignified in her coffin. She looked strange to
me, but not terrifying. But this, this was something other
than death. The murdered are not dead; the murdered
lament as if they were screaming with the most extreme and
unbearable pain. We knew that, the policeman and I, and we
knew that the shop was haunted. And then something began
to dawn on me. I don’t know whether we have souls or not;
but there are immortal things within us, and one of them is
this instinctive desire for justice. I’m no better than anyone
else, but there is something within me that isn’t only mine,
that doesn’t belong only to me — the notion of a more
exacting and more powerful order. I know I’m saying this
badly, but at that moment I understood what crime is and
what is meant by an offense against God. You see, a person
who’s been murdered is like a holy place that’s been violated
and defiled.”
“But what about the man who killed that old woman?” Mr.
Dobes asked after a moment’s silence. “Did they catch
him?”
“They caught him,” continued Mr. Hanak, “and I saw
him two days later, when the police were taking him out of
the shop; they’d been cross-examining him at the scene of
the crime, as it’s called. I don’t suppose I saw him for more
than five seconds, but once again I seemed to be looking
through some sort of lens that magnified things to a monstrous
size. He was a young farm hand of some sort; they’d
handcuffed him, and he was barreling along at such a pace
that the policemen could hardly keep up with him.
His nose was sweaty and his bulging eyes were blinking
with fear — he looked as scared and horrified as a rabbit
undergoing vivisection. I’ll never forget that face as long as I
live. That encounter was very painful for me, and it left me
feeling sick. Now they’ll prosecute him, I thought; they’ll
363
drag him through the courts for a couple of months and
then they’ll sentence him to death. In the end, I realized that
I truly felt sorry for him, and that I would almost have been
relieved if, somehow or other, he’d gotten off scot-free. Not
that his face was sympathetic, rather the opposite; but I’d
seen him at too close quarters — I’d seen those eyes, blinking
in agony. Damn it all, I’m not some bleeding-heart
sentimentalist. But at such close range he wasn’t a murderer,
he was just a man. Look, I don’t understand it myself; and
frankly, I don’t know what I would have done if I’d been the
judge. But the whole thing left me feeling as sorrowful as if
it were my own soul that needed saving.”
364
The Juror
“I had to judge once,” Mr. Firbas said, clearing his throat,
“because I was called up as a juror. That’s when the case of
Lujza Kadanikova came before the court, that woman who
murdered her husband. There were eight of us men on the
jury, and four women. Well, we men agreed beforehand,
more or less without saying a word, that those four females
would see to it that the woman went free! And so we steeled
ourselves against this Lujza in advance.
“By and large, it was an ordinary enough case of an
unhappy marriage. Kadanik was a public surveyor who’d
married a wife some twenty years younger than he. Lujza
was just a young girl when she married, and a witness was
found who testified that on the day after her wedding she
was already crying, white as chalk and trembling in protest
whenever her new husband tried to touch her. I’ve often
thought that it must be an appalling experience sometimes,
what an innocent and inexperienced girl goes through after
her wedding; her husband’s probably accustomed to girls,
you see, and treats her accordingly. My guess is, a man can’t
begin to imagine what it’s like. — But the state prosecutor,
in turn, ferreted out other witnesses who said that this Lujza
had already had something going with some student or other
prior to her marriage and that she corresponded with him
even after the wedding. In short, it was shown that no
sooner was the wedding over than the marriage had already
turned sour. Lujza made her physical disgust for her husband
clear; after a year she had a miscarriage, and from that time
on she had some kind of female disorder. Kadanik went
looking elsewhere to compensate for his marriage turning
365
sour, and at home he made a fuss over every cent. On the
unhappy day they had another scene, this time on account of
a silk blouse, and Kadanik began giving her a piece of his
mind about how he wasn’t going to be badgered in his own
home. That’s when Lujza approached him from behind and
shot him with a revolver in the base of his skull. Then she
bolted down the corridor and banged on the neighbors’
door, telling them to go to her husband, that she had killed
him and was going to go turn herself in; but she toppled
over on the steps, in convulsions. That’s the whole case.
“Well, we sat in judgment for twenty days. They say
that Lujza used to be a pretty thing, but custody, you know,
doesn’t do much for female beauty; she looked bloated, with
only these angry and hateful eyes blazing out from her pale
face. The presiding judge was enthroned up above like
justice personified, terribly dignified and almost priest-like in
his black robe. Counsel for the prosecution was the bestlooking
lawyer I’ve ever seen: strong as a bull, tense and
aggressive as a well-fed tiger; you could tell with just what
kind of greedy intensity and skill he’d swoop down on his
prey sitting there below, hating him so fervently with those
burning eyes. Counsel for the defense leaped up irritably
every other minute and quarreled with counsel for the
prosecution. It was distressing for us jurors, because it
seemed like the quarreling wasn’t about the trial of the
murderous woman, but about some sort of dispute between
the prosecution and the defense.
“Well, we were judges representing the people; we’d
come there to judge in accordance with the consciences of
ordinary people. But even with the best will in the world, we
were mostly bored to despair by the lawyers’ bickering and
the courtroom formalities. The audience pushed their way
forward and gloated over the case of Lujza Kadanikova;
whenever she was silent from nervous strain and exhaustion,
you could hear those people almost grunting with pleasure.”
Mr. Firbas wiped his forehead, as if he were sweating. “I
366
can tell you, in those moments it was as if I weren’t a judge
drawn by lot but a man on the rack — as if I myself were
compelled to leap up and say, I confess to everything, do
with me as you will.
“After that came the witnesses, each of them giving
their statements with great significance, inflated with selfimportance
just because they knew something. And from
their testimony you got the impression of a whole town
there, a scrap heap of spite, gossip, favoritism, speculation,
envy, intrigue, politicking, and boredom. According to the
witnesses, the deceased was an honorable and forthright man
and a decent citizen, enjoying the finest of reputations;
furthermore, he was a womanizer and a tightwad, a brute, a
pervert, and an animal; in short, take your pick. Lujza came
out worse: they said she was a vain and flirtatious little
minx, she wore silk underwear, she didn’t give two hoots for
housework, she ran up debts —
“Counsel for the prosecution leaned over with an icy
smile: ‘Defendant, you had an intimate relationship with a
certain man even after you were married?’
“The defendant said nothing, but a dull red flush spread
across her cheeks.
“Counsel for the defense pounced: ‘Might the court hear
from so-and-so, whom Kadanik took advantage of when she
was a maid in his household? He had a child by her — ‘
“The presiding judge frowned; you could tell that he
was thinking, my God, will this trial never end? — Meanwhile,
the painful domestic affairs dragged on without end:
which of the two was responsible for initiating the marital
strife, how much Lujza received for household expenses,
whether her husband had any cause for jealousy. Throughout
the hours and hours of this, it sometimes seemed to me that
they weren’t talking about the dead Kadanik and his marriage,
but about me or some other juror or, for all I knew,
any one of us. Good Lord, what they were saying about the
dead man I’ve done, too; I suppose everyone everywhere
367
does such things, so why talk about it? It seemed to me as
if, one by one, they were stripping down all of us there, men
and women both; as if they were washing our private
squabbles in public, airing our dirty little intimacies, dredging
up the secrets of our beds and habits. Believe me, it was
just as if they were describing our own personal lives there,
but somehow so cruelly and relentlessly that it seemed like
hell. This Kadanik wasn’t, as a matter of fact, the worst of
men. He was a bit on the rough side, he flew off the handle
at his wife and humiliated her; he was heavy-handed and
stingy, because he didn’t make that much. He was a randy
bastard: he seduced the household help and was having an
affair with a widow — but maybe it was out of spite and
injured male vanity, because Lujza hated him as if he were
some kind of disgusting insect. And I can tell you that when
one of the defense witnesses testified against the murdered
man, about how he was cantankerous and small-minded, a
brutal, sexually crude, and domineering man, something akin
to dislike and solidarity stirred in us male jurors. Stop right
there! we thought, if we could be shot for no worse than
this — And again, when another witness made things worse
for Lujza, saying that she was a featherbrain, a flashy
dresser and all those kinds of things, we men in the jury box
felt something almost like generosity, something like wanting
to take her under our wing, while the four women amongst
us pressed their lips together tightly and stared at her with
unforgiving eyes.
“For hours and days this conjugal hell dragged on, as
seen through the eyes of maids and doctors, neighbors and
gossips: the discord and the debts, the illnesses, the household
scenes, every nasty, irrational, and agonizing experience
that a human couple undergoes. It was like having human
entrails hung out on display in all their wretched ugliness.
Listen, I have a decent and loving wife; but in those moments
I saw not Lujza Kadanikova there below me, but my
own wife, my Lida, accused of shooting her husband Firbas
368
in the back of the skull. I felt the terrible, biting pain of that
bullet in my head. I saw Lida, pale and swollen, compressing
her lips and raking me with eyes frantic with terror, disgust,
and humiliation. It was Lida whom they were stripping and
eviscerating here; it was my wife, my bedroom, my secrets,
my sorrows, my crudeness. I all but wept and said, ‘Oh,
Lida, see what you have brought us to!’ I closed my eyes so
that I could drive away those terrible delusions, but the
witnesses’ statements were even more tormenting in the
dark. And when my eyes stared down in horror at Lujza, my
heart constricted: My God, Lida, how you’ve changed!
“And when I got back home from jury duty that day,
Lida was waiting for me impatiently with the question,
‘Well, will she be convicted?’ — In its own way, the trial
was a sensation, attracting the interest mainly of married
women — ‘I,’ my wife announced with agitation and urgent
concern, ‘I would convict her!’
“‘It’s absolutely no business of yours,’ I shouted at her;
it was harrowing for me to talk about it with her. The final
night before the verdict, anxiety closed in on me. I wandered
from room to room, contemplating: Suppose we let Lujza
go; what use would those four women on the jury be? One
more vote against conviction, and she’ll go free. So what,
then, will my vote be? — I found no answer to that; then
from out of nowhere the uneasy thought struck me: I have a
loaded revolver in the bedside table — it’s a habit from the
army; how easily it might happen that someday it would
come in handy for my wife, Lida! I seized the revolver in my
hand — couldn’t I hide it or just get rid of it altogether?
Not yet, I thought wryly, not until I see how things turn out
for Lujza! — And then I began torturing myself again: Yes,
how will things turn out — and what in heaven’s name will
I do, what will my vote be?
“On the last day counsel for the prosecution spoke,
forcefully and well. I don’t know what made him think he
had the right, but he made use of every word in the book
369
about the value of family relationships. I listened as if from
a distance to how he put such heavy, special emphasis on
the words family, domestic life, marriage, husband and wife,
the role and obligations of women — they say it was one of
the most brilliant speeches ever given before the court. Then
Lujza’s lawyer took the stand and did a horrible thing: he
based his defense on an analysis of sexual pathology. He
tried to establish the kind of disgust that a sexually cold or,
as they say, frigid woman must feel for the sexual organs of
a crude, insensitive man; how her physical disgust grows
into hatred; how a woman like that, surrendering to the will
and lusts of a ruthless sexual tyrant, becomes a tragic victim.
— In that moment you could sense how the entire jury
changed course and hardened their hearts against Lujza, how
a subconscious disgust broke out among the jurors against
these abnormal things that somehow upset and threatened
the rules of society or whatever. The four women on the jury
were ashen-faced, and their icy hostility bore down on the
woman who had violated such things as obligation. And that
idiot lawyer went on fervently spreading his sexual theories.
“The presiding judge patiently eyed the shocked faces of
the jury and in his summation did his best to salvage the
situation. He spoke about neither the family nor sexual
serfdom, but about the murdered man, and that made it
easier for us jurors. Frankly, from that point of view the
case became more digestible for us somehow, more simple
and very nearly bearable.
“Up to the final moment I didn’t know how I would
vote on the question of guilt. But when they put the question
before us: Is Lujza Kadanikova guilty of shooting her husband,
Jan Kadanik, with intent to kill? — I, whose turn
came first, said yes without thinking twice, because in truth
she had intended to murder him, and she did.
“After that there was a puzzled silence. I looked over at
the four women on our jury. Their expressions were stern
and almost ceremonial, as if they were prepared to do battle
370
on behalf of the family.
“When I returned home, my wife Lida burst out, pale
with excitement, ‘Well, how did it turn out?’
“‘You mean for Lujza,’ I said mechanically. ‘Twelve
votes for conviction. She was sentenced to death by hanging.’
“‘That’s awful,’ Lida gasped with naive cruelty, ‘but she
deserves it!’
“Suddenly the tension or whatever it was inside me
broke. ‘Yes,’ I shouted at Lida with an irritability that I
myself could not comprehend, ‘she deserved it because she
was a fool! Just keep in mind, Lida, that if she’d shot him in
the temple instead of in the base of his skull, she could
claim that he committed suicide. Do you understand, Lida?
Then she would have gone free. — Remember that: in the
temple!’
“I banged the door shut behind me; I needed desperately
to be alone. In case you’re wondering, my revolver is
still in that unlocked drawer. I never got rid of it.”
371
The Last Things of Man
“Being sentenced to death is a horrible experience,” Mr.
Kukla said. “I know this, because I once experienced my last
moments of life not long before my execution. Needless to
say, it happened in a dream; but dreams are as much a part
of our lives as anything else, even if they’re only on the
margin. You won’t find much on the margin that speaks to
your better qualities, nothing in your life that you go around
bragging about; what’s out there are sex, fear, vanity, and
several other things that we’re more or less ashamed of.
Maybe these are the last things of man.
“One afternoon I came home exhausted as a pack
horse, I’d been working so hard. So I lay down on the floor,
and in no time I was sleeping like a log. And then, for no
reason at all, I dreamed that the door opened, and there in
the doorway stood an utterly unfamiliar man with two
soldiers behind him, holding bayonets at the ready; I don’t
know why, but the soldiers were wearing Cossack uniforms.
‘Get up,’ the stranger said harshly, ‘and get ready. Tomorrow
morning we carry out your death sentence. Did you hear
me?’
“‘I heard you,’ I said, ‘but I don’t understand why — ‘
“‘That’s not our affair,’ the man snapped. ‘We’re here to
serve the order for your execution.’ And he banged the door
shut behind him.
“Afterwards I stood there, alone, and thought it over.
But I don’t really know: when a man thinks in a dream, is
he really thinking or does he only dream that he’s thinking?
Were they my thoughts, or were they only thoughts that I
dreamed, the way we dream of faces? All I know is that I
372
was thinking fast and furiously, and yet at the same time I
was marveling at my thoughts. At first I concentrated, with
a certain malicious satisfaction, on the idea that it was all a
mistake, that I would be executed tomorrow morning because
of some official blunder and that they would be
disgraced and discredited by it. But along with that a terrible
distress arose in me: that I really would be executed and that
my wife and child would be left behind; what would happen
to them, what in God’s name would they do — I can tell
you that the pain was genuine, as if my heart were truly
bleeding, and yet at the same time I found it rather pleasant
and gratifying for me to think so solicitously of my wife and
children. Well, well, I said to myself, so these are the last
thoughts of a man who is going to his death! It cheered me
up, somehow, that I was indulging in such overwhelming
paternal grief; it struck me as being rather noble and uplifting.
I basked in the idea of telling my wife about it.
“But then a shock ran through me: I remembered that
executions usually take place in the wee hours around
daybreak, at four or five in the morning, and that I would
have to rise up early in order to be executed. The fact is, I
hate getting up in the morning; and now the image of those
soldiers rousing me at dawn blotted out everything else; my
heart plummeted and I nearly wept with sorrow over my
fate. It was so terrifying that it woke me up, and I could
only lie there, gasping with relief. And I never did tell my
wife about that dream.”
“The last things of man,” said Mr. Skrivanek, and his face
grew red with embarrassment. “I could tell you something
about that, but maybe it would sound silly to you.”
“It wouldn’t,” Mr. Taussig assured him. “Just spit it
out!”
“I just don’t know,” Mr. Skrivanek said uncertainly.
“What I mean is, I once wanted to shoot myself, and so —
373
since Mr. Kukla here was talking about the margin of life —
That’s out there on the margin of life, too: when a man
wants to kill himself.”
“Go on,” said Mr. Karas, “why did you want to do it?”
“It was out of weakness,” said Mr. Skrivanek, turning
still redder. “What I mean is, I . . . I’m no good at tolerating
pain. And at the time I had inflammation of the trigeminal
nerve — The doctors say it can be one of the worst pains
that a person can — I just don’t know.”
“That’s true,” muttered Dr. Vitasek. “I commiserate
with you. Does it keep recurring?”
“It does,” Mr. Skrivanek blushed again, “but I no
longer want to . . . That is, what I was going to tell you —”
“Then please, tell us,” Mr. Dolezal encouraged him.
“It’s hard to put it into words,” Mr. Skrivanek resisted
shyly. “As a matter of fact . . . that pain . . . ”
“Would have a man screaming like an animal,” remarked
Dr. Vitasek.
“Yes. And when it was worst of all . . . the third night .
. . I set my revolver on the nightstand. One more hour, I
thought, I can’t endure it any longer than that. Why me,
why is it that I’m the one who has to suffer so much? I kept
thinking that a terrible injustice was being done to me. Why
me, why is this happening to me — ”
“You had medicine to take,” growled Dr. Vitasek.
“Trigemin or veramon, adalin, algokratin, migradon — ”
“I took them,” protested Mr. Skrivanek. “Listen, I’d
gulped so many pills that . . . that they stopped working.
What I mean is . . . those pills put me to sleep, but the pain
never slept, do you understand? The pain remained, but it
was no longer my pain, because I was . . . so drugged that I
was completely outside myself. I was no longer aware of me,
but I was aware of the pain; and it began to seem that the
pain was someone else’s. I could hear that other being . . .
He was howling and moaning so quietly, and I felt so
terribly sorry for him . . . I was weeping tears of sorrow. I
374
could feel the pain growing and growing — my God, I
thought, what this person is enduring! Perhaps . . . perhaps
if I shot him, he wouldn’t have to suffer so! But at the same
time I was horrified at the thought . . . no, it’s not possible,
I can’t do it! I don’t know; suddenly I felt a curious respect
for his life, simply because he was undergoing such incredible
pain — ”
Mr. Skrivanek rubbed his forehead in bewilderment. “I
don’t know how to describe it to you. Perhaps it was delirium
from all those pills, but at the same time it was so
incredibly clear to me . . . dazzlingly clear. I had a vision of
that being, that other who was suffering and groaning, as
humankind . . . as Man himself. And I was only a witness to
its torment . . . a night watchman at the bedside of pain. If I
hadn’t been there beside it, I thought, the pain would have
been in vain. It would have been a kind of great achievement,
an act of greatness that no one would have known
anything about. I mean, earlier . . . when it was my pain . .
. I’d felt as wretched and pitiful as a worm . . . and every
bit as insignificant. But now . . . now that the pain had
transcended me . . . I felt almost with a sense of terror how
great life truly is. I felt that . . . ” Mr. Skrivanek was sweating
with embarrassment. “Don’t laugh at me. I felt that the
pain was a . . . a kind of offering, a sacrifice. That’s why,
you see, that’s why each religion . . . places pain on the altar
of its god. That’s why there were bloody sacrifices . . . and
martyrs . . . and Christ on the cross. I understood that . . .
that . . . that a kind of mysterious blessing flows from the
pain of Man. That’s why we have to suffer, so that life can
be sanctified. No joy is strong or great enough . . . And I
felt that if I came through this, I would be carrying something
like a sacrament inside me.”
“And are you?” Father Voves asked with interest.
Mr. Skrivanek blushed violently. “Oh, no,” he replied
hurriedly, “that’s something a person wouldn’t know anything
about. But ever since that time . . . I’ve had such
375
respect, such a reverence in me; everything seems more
important to me now . . . each little thing and each human
being, do you understand? Everything has enormous value.
Whenever I see a sunset, I tell myself it was worth that
incredible pain. And people, their work, their ordinary lives .
. . all of it has value because of that pain. And I know it’s a
terrible and unspeakable price to pay — But I truly believe
that it isn’t some evil or punishment; it’s only pain, and it
serves to . . . to give life this enormous worth — ” Mr.
Skrivanek stopped, not knowing how to go on. “You’ve been
so kind to me,” he suddenly blurted out and, much moved,
he blew his nose to hide his burning face.